




BOOK OF NEEDS.




                              BOOK OF NEEDS
                                  OF THE
                           HOLY ORTHODOX CHURCH
                                   WITH
                               AN APPENDIX
                        CONTAINING OFFICES FOR THE
                           LAYING ON OF HANDS.

                            DONE INTO ENGLISH
                                    BY
                               G. V. SHANN.

                                 LONDON:
                         DAVID NUTT, 270 STRAND.
                                  1894.




                                    TO
                              HIS EXCELLENCY
                           C.P. POBEDONOSTZEFF,
                           CHIEF-PROCURATOR OF
                      THE MOST HOLY GOVERNING SYNOD
                                OF RUSSIA,
                            THESE TRANSLATIONS
                              ARE INSCRIBED.




PREFACE.


The following pages contain a translation with some omissions, of the
Slavonic service book entitled, _Trébnik_, or, _Book of Needs_, so
called, because it contains the provision for that which is spiritually
needed by a Christian from the cradle to the grave.

To this is added, as an appendix, a translation of a portion
of the service book entitled, _Chinóvnik archieréiskaho
svyashtshennosloujéniya_, or, _Office book of the bishop’s holy service_,
namely, that pertaining to the laying on of hands.[1]

The original used for the translation of the first named work is an
edition published in Moscow in the year 1882, and that for the portion of
the second, one published in the same city in the year 1890.

The omissions, made under competent advice, in the translation of
_Trébnik_ are as follows,

I. The entire of the epistle and gospel lessons, these being indicated
by their initial and concluding words only, with one exception, namely,
in the office of the sanctification of water on the festival of the
Epiphany, where the lessons from the prophecy being written at length
those of the epistle and gospel are made to correspond.

II. Questions asked of penitents in the confessional, and instructions
concerning the imposition of penance, as explained in foot-notes at pages
49 and 51.

III. Some prayers for various occasions which are not of general interest
(chapters xxii, xxiii, xxx, xxxi, xxxii, xxxiv, xxxv, xxxvi, xxxvii,
xxxviii, xxxix, xl, and xli).

IV. Extracts from the Nomocanon (chap. xlii), many of which refer to
obsolete heathen customs and habits, and all need the living voice of the
pastors of the church for their proper present application.

V. The Kalendar and the Paschal Tables (chapters xliii and xliv), these
having been given in the translator’s former work, _Euchology_, published
in Kidderminster in the year 1891.[2]

It should be understood that the originals are books for the use of
those who are conversant with the order of the church service, and that,
for that reason, many abbreviations appear in them, well known prayers,
verses, etc, being indicated by initial words only, or by ecclesiastical
terms. As these abbreviations have been imitated in the translations,
some notes are given, which, it is hoped, may remove most of the
obscurities, which, to the general reader, might appear to pervade the
work.

                                                              G. V. SHANN.

Oldswinford, Epiphany, 1894.




NOTES.




NOTE I. EXPLANATORY OF ECCLESIASTICAL TERMS.


_Aër._ The external veil which is used to cover both chalice and paten.

_Antidoron._ That which remains of a _Prosphora_ (loaf of oblation) after
the portion for consecration has been cut from it. This remainder is
given to communicants (together with wine and warm water) immediately
after the holy sacrament, and is also distributed to those of the
congregation who are not communicants at the end of the Liturgy instead
of the holy gifts themselves, and, for that reason, it is called
_Antidoron_. In the primitive church its distribution was known under the
term _Agape_, _i.e._, Love-feast.

_Axios._ Worthy. An exclamation, referring to the candidates, used at
ordinations.

_Canon._ An ecclesiastical composition, commemorative of any given
festival or occasion, consisting of nine spiritual songs, according to
the number of the degrees of the incorporeal hosts, based upon these
nine scriptural odes, or prayers, I. The song of Moses in Exodus (_chap.
xv._ 1-19). II. The song of Moses in Deuteronomy (_chap. xxxii._ 1-43).
This song, being indicative of God’s judgment against sinners, is sung
only in penitential seasons, hence a Canon usually lacks the second Ode,
the third following immediately on the first. III. The prayer of Anna (_1
Kings ii._ 1-10). IV. The prayer of Abbacum (_chap. iii._ 2 _ad fin._).
V. The prayer of Esaias (_chap. xxvi._ 9-20). VI. The prayer of Jonas
(_chap. ii._ 2-9). VII. The prayer of the Three Children (_Daniel iii_).
VIII. The song of the same (_Benedicite_). IX. The song of Zacharias
(_Benedictus_), preceded by that of the Virgin (_Magnificat_). Every
Ode in a Canon is preceded by a verse called _Irmos_, itself being the
rhythmical model of the verses that follow, which are called _Troparia_,
because they turn upon a model. The _Irmos_ however is frequently
omitted, or is sung only before Odes iii, vi, and ix (as also after
these). See pages 210, 214, and 218. A refrain pervades all the Odes. See
pages 129, 183, and 209. The refrains for the Canons at pages 85 and 145
are not expressed in the text, but these are respectively, “Have mercy
upon me, O God, have mercy upon me,” and, “Rest, O Lord, thy sleeping
servant’s soul.” The refrain is sung or said between every verse except
the last two, “Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy
Ghost,” being prefixed to the last but one, and “Both now and ever, and
to ages of ages. Amen” to the last, which last is always addressed to
the God-bearing Virgin. Sometimes, _e.g._, in penitential seasons, the
verses of the Odes are sung together with those of their scriptural
prototypes, and the rubric then indicates to how many of these verses,
counting backwards from the last, the ecclesiastically composed ones are
to be subjoined. Thus at page 128 the Canon is directed to be sung to vi,
_i.e._, six verses (counting backwards) of the scriptural prototype in
each Ode; but in this case, if so sung, the refrain would be omitted. A
Canon is moreover usually divided into three parts, the division taking
place after the third and sixth Odes, a verse called _Kathisma_, or one
called _Hypacoë_, frequently occurring after Ode iii, and one called
_Condakion_, followed by one or more called _Icos_ (_pl._ _Icosi_)
after Ode vi. Sometimes an epistle and gospel lection occurs after the
_Condakion_ and _Icos_. See page 167. Finally, it is to be remarked that
an _Ectenia_ (q. v.) usually follows Ode iii (before the _Kathisma_), Ode
vi (before the _Condakion_ and _Icos_), and Ode ix.

_Cherubic Hymn._ The song sung at the great Introit in the celebration
of the Liturgy, when the prepared gifts are solemnly carried from the
_Prothesis_ (table of oblations) through the church to the altar. The
words of the ancient song accompanying this rite are as follows,

Let all mortal flesh be still, and let it stand in fear and awe, and
think of nothing earthly to itself, because the King of kings and Lord of
lords approacheth to be slain, and given for the faithful’s food.

                  (_Here the procession takes place._)

Him do precede th’ angelic choirs, with all their principals and powers,
the cherubim of many eyes, and the six-winged seraphim, who shade their
faces and sing forth the song, Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia.

These words however are now only sung on Holy Saturday, and, except on
that day, and on Holy Thursday, and at the Liturgy of the Presanctified,
are substituted by the following, dating from the time of Justinian,

We, who the cherubim in mystery represent and sing the song thrice-holy
to the quickening Trinity, should put away now every care of life,

                          (_The procession._)

That we the King of all things may receive, who borne in is on spears by
angel ranks unseen. Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia.

On Holy Thursday the words are,

Of thy mysterious supper, Son of God, me a communicant accept to-day; for
I thy mystery to thy foes will not betray, nor give to thee a kiss as
Judas did; but, as the thief, I will confess thee: Lord, in thy kingdom O
remember me.

                          (_The procession._)

Of thy mysterious supper.... _the whole again, concluding with the thrice
sung Alleluia_.

And at the Liturgy of the Presanctified,

Now serve the heavenly powers unseen with us; for, lo, the King of glory
cometh in. Behold, the mystic sacrifice, that perfected hath been, is
borne in on the spears.

                          (_The procession._)

Let us draw near with faith and love, that we of life immortal may
partakers be. Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia.

_Condakion._ A short verse expressing the purport of any given festival
or occasion. See Canon.

_Dismissal._ The concluding words of an office. A full form of these is
given at page 222, but in other places, when they are expressed at all,
it is in a more or less fragmentary manner.

_Ectenia._ A form of prayer consisting of a number of rogations with
responses. There is a great, and a little Ectenia, an Ectenia of earnest
prayer, and one of supplication. The normal form of these is as follows,

          _The great Ectenia, called also the Ectenia of peace._

In peace let us pray to the Lord. _Response._ Lord, have mercy, _and so
after the succeeding rogations_. For the peace that is from above, and
for the salvation of our souls, let us pray to the Lord. For the peace of
the whole world, the good estate of the holy churches of God, and for
the union of them all, let us pray to the Lord. For this holy temple,
and for them that with faith, piety, and fear of God enter into it, let
us pray to the Lord. For the most holy Governing Synod, and for our
Metropolitan, _name_, for our Archbishop, or Bishop, _name_, _according
to the eparchy_, for the honourable presbytery, the diaconate in Christ,
and for all the clergy and the laity, let us pray to the Lord. _Here
follow rogations for the Emperor and the Imperial Family, mentioning them
by name._ To aid them and to subdue under their feet every enemy and
adversary, let us pray to the Lord. For this city (_if it is monastery_,
For this holy habitation), for every city and country, and for them that
in faith dwell therein, let us pray to the Lord. For healthiness of
weather, for plentifulness of the fruits of the earth, and for peaceful
times, let us pray to the Lord. For them that voyage, that journey, that
are sick, that are suffering, that are in bonds, and for their salvation,
let us pray to the Lord. _Here are inserted additional rogations for
special circumstances._ For our deliverance from all affliction, passion,
and want, let us pray to the Lord. Help us, save us, have mercy on us,
and keep us, O God, by thy grace. Commemorating our most holy, most pure,
most blessed glorious Lady, the God-bearing Ever-virgin Mary, together
with all the Saints, let us commend ourselves, and one another, and all
our life to Christ our God. _Response._ To thee, O Lord. _Exclamation by
the priest._ For to thee is due all glory, honour, and Worship, to the
Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, now and ever, and to ages
of ages. _Response._ Amen.

                          _The little Ectenia._

Again and again in peace let us pray to the Lord. Help us....
Commemorating.... _as in the great Ectenia, with a varying exclamation_.

                     _The Ectenia of earnest prayer._

Let us all say with our whole soul, and with our whole mind let us say,
_Response_. Lord, have mercy. O Lord almighty, O God of our fathers, we
pray thee, hear, and have mercy. _Response._ Lord, have mercy. Have mercy
upon us, O God, according to thy great mercy, we pray thee, hear, and
have mercy. _Response._ Lord, have mercy, _three times; and so after the
succeeding rogations, the next being for the Emperor and the Imperial
Family, mentioning them by name. Then the Synod, the Metropolitan, and
all sorts and conditions of men, and those especially for whom the
occasion serves are mentioned, and the Ectenia is concluded by the priest
with the exclamation_, For thou art a merciful and man-loving God, and
to thee we ascribe glory, to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy
Ghost, now and ever, and to ages of ages. _Response._ Amen.

                      _The Ectenia of supplication._

Let us fulfil our supplication to the Lord. _Response._ Lord, have mercy.
Help us, save us, have mercy on us, and keep us, O God, by thy grace.
_Response._ Lord, have mercy. That the whole day may be perfect, holy,
peaceful, and sinless, let us ask of the Lord. _Response._ Vouchsafe,
O Lord, _and so successively_. An angel of peace, a faithful guide, a
guardian of our souls and bodies, let us ask of the Lord. Pardon and
forgiveness of our sins and iniquities, let us ask of the Lord. What is
good and profitable for our souls, and peace for the world, let us ask
of the Lord. That the remaining time of our life may be accomplished in
peace and repentance, let us ask of the Lord. A christian end of our
life, painless, unashamed, peaceful, and a good answer at the fearful
judgment-seat of Christ, let us ask. Commemorating.... _as before
written, with an exclamation, or_, Having prayed.... See page 69.

_Epigonation._ A lozenge shaped ornament, worn by bishops and
archimandrites, suspended from the girdle and resting upon the knee. It
signifies a spiritual sword, with which the wearers should defend those
committed to their charge.

_Epitrachelion._ The priest’s stole.

_Exapostilarion._ A verse said or sung before the psalms of praise
(Psalms cxlviii, cxlix, and cl). Some derive the term from the verse
being sung by one of the clergy who is sent out of his place in the choir
into the middle of the church to sing it; but others from it being a
verse substituting a more ancient series of verses (Lucerns), in which
the Lord is prayed to send forth light unto us.

_Hypacoë._ A term implying that the verse bearing its name should be
listened to with particular attention.

_Icos._ A stanza. See Canon.

_Idiomelon (pl. Idiomela)._ A verse that is of its own mode, _i.e._, one
not composed upon an _Irmos_, or model.

_Irmos (pl. Irmi)._ See Canon.

_Kathisma._ A verse during the singing of which it is permitted to sit.

_Omophorion._ The bishop’s pall.

_Orarion._ The deacon’s stole.

_Phelonion._ A vestment or cope.

_Prokimenon._ A verse, taken from the psalms, sung before the reading
of an appointed epistle. With this is conjoined another verse, and the
mode of saying and singing these is as follows. The reader says the
prokimenon, and the choir repeats the same. Then the reader says the
conjoined verse, and the choir again sings the prokimenon. Finally the
reader says half the prokimenon, and the choir sings the remaining half.

_Sloujébnik._ The service book containing the prayers said by the priest
and deacon at Vespers, Matins, and Liturgy.

_Stasis._ A subdivision of the psalter. The whole psalter is divided into
twenty sections, and each of these is subdivided into three parts.[3]

_Sticharion._ A tunicle.

_Stichera._ Ecclesiastically composed verses, usually conjoined with
verses selected from the psalms.

_Theotokion._ A verse addressed to the God-bearing Virgin.

_Tone._ The ecclesiastical tones are eight in number, and are based upon
the ancient classical modes, namely, the Dorian, Phrygian, Lydian, and
Ionian for tones i to iv, and the minors of these for tones v to viii.
The Slavonic, Greek, and Gregorian tones correspond thus,

    _Slavonic._  _Greek._  _Gregorian._
         I.         I.           I.
        II.        II.         III.
       III.       III.           V.
        IV.        IV.         VII.
         V.      I minor.       II.
        VI.     II minor.       IV.
       VII.       Grave.        VI.
      VIII.     IV minor.     VIII.

_Trisagion._ The thrice-holy hymn, the words of which are as follow,

Holy God, holy mighty one, holy immortal one, have mercy upon us, sung
three times.

When sung in a more solemn manner at the Liturgy and other offices before
the reading of the epistle and gospel the mode is thus,

Holy God, holy mighty one, holy immortal one, have mercy upon us. _Three
times._

Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, both now and
ever, and to ages of ages. Amen.

Holy immortal one, have mercy upon us.

                                (Dynamis.)

Holy God, holy mighty one, holy immortal one, have mercy upon us.

At Easter, Pentecost, Christmas, and Epiphany, on the day before Palm
Sunday, on Holy Saturday, and at Baptisms, this hymn is superseded by the
following,

As many as have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ. Alleluia.
_Three times._

Glory to the Father.... _ending_, to ages of ages. Amen.

Have put on Christ. Alleluia.

As many as have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ. Alleluia.

                          See pages 35 and 167.

_Troparion._ A verse that is composed (_lit._ turns) upon a model. See
Canon. The term has also a wider signification, and is used to indicate
the principal commemorative verse for any festival or occasion, and as
such is referred to in the text as “the troparion for the day.”




NOTE II. EXPLANATORY OF ABBREVIATIONS.


The abbreviations found in the text, and not explained in Note i, are,

I. Blessed be our God....

II. Blessed be the kingdom....

III. Trisagion. O most holy Trinity.... Our Father.... For thine is the
kingdom....

IV. _Glory. Both now._

V. The more honourable than the cherubim....

VI. Now dismiss thy servant, O Master.... Pages 11 and 126.

VII. O come, let us worship.... _thrice_. Pages 46, 83, 123, and 128.

VIII. It is very meet.... Pages 51, 92, and 136.

IX. Alleluia, _thrice_. Pages 83 and 145.

X. Have mercy upon me, O God.... Page 85.

XI. Holy God.... Pages 138, 141, 164, 169, 220, and 224.

XII. Having seen the resurrection of Christ, we adore.... Pages 166 and
167.

XIII. Blessed art thou, O Lord: O teach me thy statutes. The angelic
counsel was amazed.... Page 167.

XIV. Glory to God in the highest.... Vouchsafe, O Lord.... Page 198.

XV. It is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord.... Page 207.

XVI. _The irmi of the great canon_, A help and protection.... Page 208.

XVII. Thou who man-lovingly in depth of wisdom.... We have thee as a
fortress and a haven.... Page 209.

XVIII. God is the Lord, and hath manifested himself unto us.... Page 225.

XIX. Hear us, O God our Saviour, thou hope of all the ends of the
earth.... Page 238.

XX. Blessed be the name of the Lord.... Page 253.

XXI. Forgive, remit.... Page 11 Appendix.

XXII. And may the mercies.... Pages 11 and 12 Appendix.

These written at length are as follows, the first five being of frequent
occurrence,

I and II. The priest’s initial blessing, Blessed be our God, always, now
and ever, and to ages of ages. _Response._ Amen. And, Blessed be the
kingdom of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, now and
ever, and to ages of ages. _Response._ Amen.

III. Holy God, holy mighty one, holy immortal one, have mercy upon us,
_three times_. Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy
Ghost, both now and ever, and to ages of ages. Amen. O most holy Trinity,
have mercy upon us: O Lord, cleanse our sins: O Master, forgive our
transgressions: visit us. O Holy One, and heal our infirmities, for
thy name’s sake. Lord, have mercy, _three times_. _Again_, Glory to the
Father ... ages of ages. Amen. _The Lord’s prayer, ending_, deliver us
from evil. _Priest._ For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the
glory, of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, now and
ever, and to ages of ages. _Response._ Amen.

IV. Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

Both now and ever, and to ages of ages. Amen.

V. The more honourable than the cherubim, and incomparably more glorious
than the seraphim, who didst bear without corruption God the Word, thee,
verily the God-bearing one, we magnify.

VI. _Nunc Dimittis._

VII. O come, let us worship God our King.

O come, let us worship, and fall down before Christ God, our King.

O come, let us worship, and fall down before Christ himself, our King and
God.

VIII. It is very meet to bless thee, the God-bearing one, the ever
blessed, the entirely spotless, and the Mother of our God. The more
honourable than the cherubim, and incomparably more glorious than the
seraphim, who didst bear without corruption God the Word, thee, verily
the God-bearing one, we magnify.

IX. Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia, glory to thee, our God. _Three times._

X. Psalm 50.

XI. See Trisagion. Note i.

XII. Having seen the resurrection of Christ, we adore the holy Lord
Jesus, who alone is without sin. Thy cross, O Christ, we worship, and
sing and glorify thy holy resurrection; for thou art our God, we know
none other beside thee, we call upon thy name. O come, all ye faithful,
let us adore Christ’s holy resurrection; for by the cross great joy
is come into all the world. Ever blessing the Lord, we sing his
resurrection; for, enduring crucifixion, death by death he overthrew.

XIII. Blessed art thou, O Lord: O teach me thy statutes.

The angelic counsel was amaz’d, seeing thee number’d with the dead, thee,
Saviour, who hast overthrown the might of death, hast raised Adam with
thyself, and freed all from hades.

Blessed art thou, O Lord....

Why, O disciples, do ye mix the myrrh with pitying tears? exclaim’d the
angel standing nigh the grave to them that bore the myrrh. See ye the
grave, and understand; for risen from the grave the Saviour is.

Blessed art thou, O Lord....

They that bore myrrh made haste at early morn lamenting to thy grave, but
an angel stood before them, and he said, The time for lamentation is
gone by, weep not, but tell the resurrection the apostles.

Blessed art thou, O Lord....

The ointment-bearing women as they came with myrrh unto thy grave, O
Saviour, wail’d; but an angel spake with them, and said, Why reckon ye
the living with the dead? for he is risen from the grave as God.

Glory to the Father....

Let us adore the Father, and his Son, also the Holy Ghost, the Holy
Trinity in substance one, exclaiming with the seraphim, Thou holy, holy,
holy art, O Lord.

Both now and ever....

Thou, Virgin, who didst bear the Giver of life, hast Adam ransomed from
sin, and Eve hast given joy instead of grief; for he that was made
flesh of thee, the God and man, hath them that fell from life restored
thereunto.[4]

XIV. Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, goodwill to men.
We hymn thee, we bless thee, we worship thee, we glorify thee, we give
thanks to thee for thy great glory, O Lord, the heavenly King, O God, the
Father almighty, O Lord, the only-begotten Son, Jesus Christ, and O Holy
Ghost. O Lord God, O Lamb of God, O Son of the Father, thou that takest
away the sins of the world, have mercy upon us; thou that takest away the
sins of the world, accept our prayer. Thou that sittest on the right hand
of the Father, have mercy upon us. For thou alone art holy, thou alone
art Lord, O Jesus Christ, to the glory of God the Father. Amen. Every
day will I bless thee, and I will praise thy name to ages, and to ages
of ages. Lord, thou hast been our refuge in generation and generation. I
have said, O Lord, have mercy upon me, heal my soul, for I have sinned
against thee. Lord, I have fled unto thee, teach me to do thy will, for
thou art my God; for with thee is the fountain of life, in thy light
shall we see light: O continue forth thy mercy to them that know thee.

Vouchsafe, O Lord, to keep us this day without sin. Blessed art thou,
O Lord, O God of our fathers, and praised and glorified is thy name to
ages. Amen. O Lord, may thy mercy be upon us, like as we have put our
trust in thee. Blessed art thou, O Lord, O teach me by thy statutes.
Blessed art thou, O Master, give me understanding by thy statutes.
Blessed art thou, O Holy One, enlighten me in thy statutes. O Lord, thy
mercy endureth for ever, despise not the work of thy hand. To thee is due
praise, to thee is due a song, to thee is due glory, to the Father, and
to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, now and ever, and to ages of ages.
Amen.[5]

XV. It is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord, and to sing unto thy
name, O Most High, to proclaim thy mercy in the morning, and thy truth
every night.

XVI. _The irmi of the great canon._

1. A help and protection hath he become unto me unto salvation, he is my
God, and I will glorify him, my father’s God, and I will exalt him; for
he is glorified in glorious wise.

2. Give ear, O heaven, and I will speak, and I will sing Christ who hath
come in flesh from the Virgin.

See ye, see ye, that I am God, who of old rained manna, and caused water
to spring from the rock in the wilderness for my people, by my sole right
hand and by my strength.

3. On thy commandments’ unmov’d rock, stablish thy church, O Christ.

Stablish my fainting heart, O Lord, on thy commandments’ rock; for thou
alone art holy and the Lord.

4. The prophet heard of thine approach, O Lord, and fear’d; for thou
didst purpose of the Virgin to be born, and to appear ’mongst men; and
he exclaim’d, I heard the report of thee, and feared: glory to thy power,
O Lord.

5. Rising from the night betimes, O lover of mankind, I pray, Enlighten
me, and lead me in thine ordinances, and teach me, Saviour, to perform
thy will.

6. I cried with my whole heart to the merciful God, and he heard me from
the lowest hades, and brought back my life from corruption.

7. We have sinned, we have transgressed, we have been unrighteous before
thee, we have neither loved nor wrought that which thou hast commanded
us; still, cast us not away at the last, O God of our fathers.

8. Him that heaven’s hosts glorify, and at whose presence quake the
cherubim and seraphim, let every spirit and creature sing, bless, and set
up for evermore.

9. From conception seedless unspeakable’s the birth, of Mother
husbandless corruptless is the fruit; for God’s nativity hath nature
form’d anew. Then we, all generations, right-believingly thee magnify as
Mother who was divinely wed.

XVII. Thou who man-lovingly in depth of wisdom orderest all, and unto
all dost grant that which of service is, O Maker sole; rest thou thy
servants’ souls, O Lord, for they have plac’d their trust in thee,

Our Maker, and our Author, and our God.

We have thee as a fortress and a haven, and am accepted mediatress with
God, whom thou didst bear, God-bearing one unwed, salvation thou of them
that faithful be.[6]

XVIII. God is the Lord, and hath manifested himself unto us: blessed is
he that cometh in the name of the Lord.[7]

XIX. Hear us, O God our Saviour, thou hope of all the ends of the earth,
and of them that are far away upon the sea; and be merciful, be merciful,
O Master, concerning our sins, and have mercy upon us. For a merciful and
man-loving God thou art, and to thee we ascribe glory, to the Father, and
to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, now and ever, and to ages of ages.

XX. Blessed be the name of the Lord, from henceforth, and to all ages.

XXI. Forgive, remit, concede, O God, our sins, voluntary and involuntary,
those in word and in deed, those in knowledge and in ignorance, those in
the day and in the night, those in thought and in intention; concede them
all to us, as being good and lover of mankind.

XXII. And may the mercies of the great God and of our Saviour Jesus
Christ be with all of you.[8]




NOTE III. THE EASTER CANON, ETC. TO ELUCIDATE CHAPTER XVII.


                          _Troparion. Tone v._

Christ is risen from the dead, death by death down doth he tread, and on
them that dwell in graves he bestoweth life.

_Verse._ Let God arise, and let his enemies be scattered, and let them
that hate him flee from before him.

_Verse._ As smoke is driven away, so drive them away, as wax melteth at
the presence of fire,

_Verse._ So let the sinners perish at the presence of God, but let the
righteous rejoice.

_Verse._ This is the day which the Lord hath made, let us rejoice and be
glad therein.

_Verse._ Glory to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

_Verse._ Both now and ever, and to ages of ages. Amen.

_And to every verse the troparion_, Christ is risen ... _is added_.

                      _The Canon in tone i. Ode i._

_Irmos._ It is the day of resurrection! Ye folk, be we enlightened! It is
the Pascha, the Pascha of the Lord! For out of death to life, and unto
heaven from earth Christ God hath led us forth, us, singing victory’s
song.

_Refrain._ Christ is risen from the dead! _This is said before every
Troparion in all the Odes unless otherwise indicated._

_Troparion._ Let us the senses cleanse, and we shall see, in light
accessless of the resurrection shining Christ, and we shall clearly hear
him saying, Hail! we, singing victory’s song.

_Troparion._ Let heaven, for ’tis meet, rejoice; and let the earth be
glad; and let the world, all that unseen is and is seen, keep festival;
for Christ is risen: joy eterne!

_The Irmos is repeated, and they sing_, Christ is risen ... _the whole.
And so after every Ode._

                               _Ode iii._

_Irmos._ Come, let us drink the beverage new, not that from barren rock
in wondrous wise outpour’d; but incorruption’s fount, shower’d from the
grave of Christ, in whom we stablish’d are.

_Troparion._ Now fill’d is all with light, the heaven, the earth, yea,
and the underworld. Then let the whole creation festal keep for Christ’s
awake, whereby it stablish’d is.

_Troparion._ I was entomb’d with thee, Christ, yesterday: to-day, at
thine arising, I awake. With thee I yesterday was crucified: O Saviour,
in thy kingdom me glorify with thee.

                           _Hypacoë. Tone iv._

Preventing the dawn, and finding the stone rolled away from the grave,
they that accompanied Mary from an angel heard, Why seek ye as a man
among the dead him that in light accessless dwells? Behold the swathes of
death! Hasten, and tell the world the Lord is risen, who slayeth death;
for he is Son of God, who saves the race of men.

                                _Ode iv._

_Irmos._ With us on watching tower divine may the inspired Abbacum stand,
and show a radiant angel speaking plain, Salvation’s for the world
to-day; for Christ, th’ almighty one, is risen.

_Troparion._ Christ hath appeared as a male opening the Virgin’s womb. As
mortal, he is call’d a lamb; as undefil’d by stain, our Pasch; and, as
true God, he’s perfect nam’d.

_Troparion._ As yearling lamb our blessed crown, even Christ, of his own
will, as cleansing Pasch, was slain for all; and from the grave hath
shin’d to us again, he, glorious Sun of righteousness.

_Troparion._ David, divine forefather, leap’d, dancing the typical ark
before; and, we, beholding types fulfill’d, be we divinely glad, we,
holy folk of God; for Christ, th’ almighty one, is risen.

                                _Ode v._

_Irmos._ In the deep dawn let us arise, and let us bring, instead of
myrrh, the Lord a song, and we the Sun of righteousness shall see, Christ
shining life to all.

_Troparion._ They that were held by hades’ bonds when they thy boundless
pity saw, hasten’d, O Christ, unto the light, praising, with joyful feet,
th’ eternal Pasch.

_Troparion._ Bearing the lamps, precede we Christ, who, as a bridegroom,
from the grave comes forth, and, with the festal-loving ranks, let us
together keep the saving Pasch of God.

                                _Ode vi._

_Irmos._ Thou didst descend into earth’s lowest parts, O Christ, and
break the eternal bonds that held the captives bound, and the third day
didst rise out of the sepulchre, as Jonas from the whale.

_Troparion._ Keeping the seals entire, thou didst arise, O Christ, out of
the sepulchre, who, at thy birth, didst not destroy the virgin bars; and
thou hast op’d to us the doors of paradise.

_Troparion._ My Saviour, who, as God, didst to the Father bring thyself,
of thine own will, an offering living and unsacrific’d also, arising from
the grave, thou hast, along with thee, raised all Adam’s race.

                         _Condakion. Tone viii._

If into the grave thou didst descend, Immortal One, yet didst thou
overthrow the might of hades, and, as victor, rise, Christ God, unto the
women bearing myrrh exclaiming, Hail! and giving peace to thine apostles,
O thou that grantest resurrection unto them that fallen be.

                                 _Icos._

The Sun, that was before the sun, set once within a grave, the maidens
bearing myrrh, preventing dawn, sought as the day, and unto one another
cried, Come ye, O friends, let us with scents anoint the body that
life-bringing is, and buried is, the flesh, that raiseth fallen Adam,
that lieth in a grave. Let us go on, let us make haste, like as the Magi
did; and let us bring the myrrh as gift to him that’s wrapp’d, not in the
swaddling bands, but in a winding-sheet; and let us weep, and let us cry,
Master, arise, who grantest resurrection unto them that fallen be.

                               _Ode vii._

_Irmos._ He that delivered the children from the furnace became man, and
suffered as mortal, and, by his suffering, endued the mortal with the
beauty of immortality, even he, our fathers’ God, who only blessed and
most glorious is.

_Troparion._ The women who were divinely wise sped back to thee with
myrrh; and him whom they sought with tears as mortal, they worshipp’d
with joy as living God; and told, O Christ, to thy disciples the glad
tidings of the mystic Pasch.

_Troparion._ We celebrate the death of death, the overthrow of hades, the
first-fruits of another life that endless is, and sing exultingly the
Cause, even him, our fathers’ God, who only blessed and most glorious is.

_Troparion._ How truly sacred and all-festal is this saving and brightly
beaming night, which heraldeth the rising of the splendour-bearing day,
on which the ageless Light in flesh hath shin’d to all from out the grave.

                               _Ode viii._

_Irmos._ This is the chosen and holy day, the one that is of sabbaths
king and lord. It feast of feasts is, and triumph is of triumphs, on
which we bless Christ for aye.

_Troparion._ Come, let us in the vine’s new fruit participators be of joy
divine on the auspicious day of resurrection to Christ’s kingdom, singing
him, as God, for aye.

_Troparion._ Lift up thine eyes, O Sion, round about, and see; for, lo!
thy children come to thee, as lights by God illum’d, from the west and
from the north, from the sea and from the east, in thee blessing Christ
for aye.

_Verse._ O most holy Trinity, glory to thee, our God.

_Troparion._ Almighty Father, Word, and Spirit, nature conjoin’d in
persons three, superessential, God most high, in thee baptized we have
been, and thee we bless for evermore.

                                _Ode ix._

_Irmos._ Shine, shine, O new Jerusalem; for the glory of the Lord
is risen on thee. Exult now, and rejoice, O Sion; and thou, O pure
God-bearing one, be glad at the rising of thy Child.

_Verse._ My soul him magnifies, who willingly did suffer and was buried,
and rose the third day from the grave, even Christ, the Giver of life.

_Troparion._ O voice of thee divine, most sweet, and dear! for thou hast
promis’d undeceivingly to be with us, O Christ, until the ages end, which
holding as hope’s stablishment, let us, the faithful, joyful be.

_Verse._ Christ is the Pascha new, the living sacrifice, the Lamb of God,
who the world’s sins doth take away.

_Troparion._ O Christ, thou great most sacred Pasch, wisdom, and Word
of God, and power! grant us in wise more perfect to partake of thee thy
kingdom’s day in that no evening hath.

                       _Exapostilarion. Tone ii._

Asleep in flesh as mortal, King and Lord, on the third day thou didst
arise, arousing Adam from corruption and destroying death, O Pasch of
immortality, salvation of the world.

                           _Stichera. Tone v._

_Verse._ Let God arise....

To-day the sacred Pascha is made manifest to us, the new, the holy Pasch,
the Pascha mystical, the Pascha all-rever’d, the Pascha, even Christ the
ransomer, the Pascha undefil’d, the Pascha great, the faithful’s Pasch,
the Pasch that opes the gates of Paradise to us, the Pasch that halloweth
all that faithful be.

_Verse._ As smoke is driven away....

Come from that spectacle, ye women-gospellers, and unto Sion say, Receive
from us the joyful tidings of Christ’s resurrection. Be fervent, dance,
and joy, Jerusalem, beholding Christ the King proceed as bridegroom from
the grave.

_Verse._ So let the sinners perish....

The women bearing myrrh at early dawn stood the Life-giver’s grave
before, and found an angel sitting on the stone, and he, accosting them,
spake thus, Why seek the living mid the dead? why the corruptless wail as
though he in corruption were? Go, tell ye his disciples this!

_Verse._ This is the day which....

Pascha the fervent, Pascha, the Pascha of the Lord, the Pascha
all-rever’d hath risen on us. It Pascha is, let us with joy each other
greet. O Pascha, ransoming from grief! For, shining from the grave
to-day, as bridegroom from a bridal-room, Christ hath with joy the women
fill’d, saying, Tell the disciples this!

                           _Glory. Both now._

It is the day of resurrection, and by the triumph be illuminate we, and
we each other greet, and Brethren! to them that hate us say, and at the
resurrection everything forgive; and on this wise let us exclaim,

Christ is risen from the dead, death by death down doth he tread, and on
them that dwell in graves he bestoweth life. _Three times._




ADDITIONAL NOTES.


A. Note that in Appendix the word translated _Archpriest_ is in the
original _Archiereus_, and signifies the Bishop. There is however another
word which can only be translated into English by the term _Archpriest_,
namely _Protoiereus_, but this is a title borne by many priests who are
not of episcopal rank.

B. And note that in the Psalms the Orthodox Church follows the Septuagint
and not the Hebrew enumeration.

[Illustration]




ERRATA.


  Page XI, line 17 of Notes, omit _Archpriest._ A Bishop, as being
                      calculated to give a wrong impression. See
                      Additional Note A, page XXXIX.

    ”  51,   ”   3 of foot-note, _for_ of _read_ in.

    ”  61,   ”   8, and page 62, line 27, _for_ Gallilee _read_ Galilee.

    ”  64,   ”   3, _for_ help-meet _read_ helpmeet.

    ” 103,   ”  16, _for_ who _read_ whom.

    ” 142, lines 10 and 11, and page 158, lines 13 and 14, _for_ we ask
                      of thee, O Christ, _read_ let us ask of Christ.

    ” 158, line 4, _after_ for _insert_ the repose of.

    ” 160,   ” 18, descendants’, _omit the apostrophe_.

There are, in addition, a few obvious errors in the punctuation.

Transcriber’s Note: The errata have been corrected, including any obvious
errors in the punctuation that were found.




                                 TREBNIK.

                                 MOSCOW.
                          AT THE SYNODAL PRESS.
                               MDCCCLXXXII.

[Illustration]

To the glory of the holy, consubstantial, life-creating, and undivided
Trinity, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; by the command of our
Most Pious, Autocratic Great Lord, THE EMPEROR ALEXANDER ALEXANDROVITCH
of all Russia; before his Consort, the Most Pious Lady, THE EMPRESS MARIA
THEODOROVNA; before His Heir, the Right-believing Lord, the Cesarevitch
and Grand Duke, NICOLAUS ALEXANDROVITCH; before the Right-believing
Lords, the Grand Dukes, GEORGE and MICHAEL ALEXANDROVITCH; before the
Right-believing Lord, the Grand Duke, VLADIMIR ALEXANDROVITCH, and
before His Consort, the Lady, the Grand Duchess MARIA PAVLOVNA; before
the Right-believing Lords, the Grand Dukes, CYRIL, BORIS, and ANDREW
VLADIMIROVITCH; before the Right-believing Lords, the Grand Dukes,
ALEXIS, SERGIUS, and PAUL ALEXANDROVITCH; before the Right-believing
Lord, the Grand Duke, CONSTANTINE NICOLAEVITCH, and before His Consort,
the Right-believing Lady, the Grand Duchess, ALEXANDRA JOSEPHOVNA; before
the Right-believing Lords, the Grand Dukes, NICOLAUS, CONSTANTINE, and
DEMETRIUS CONSTANTINOVITCH; before the Right-believing Lord, the Grand
Duke, NICOLAUS NICOLAEVITCH, and before His Consort, the Right-believing
Lady, the Grand Duchess, ALEXANDRA PETROVNA; before the Right-believing
Lords, the Grand Dukes, NICOLAUS and PETER NICOLAEVITCH; before the
Right-believing Lord, the Grand Duke, MICHAEL NICOLAEVITCH, and
before His Consort, the Right-believing Lady, the Grand Duchess, OLGA
THEODOROVNA; before the Right-believing Lords, the Grand Dukes, NICOLAUS,
MICHAEL, GEORGE, ALEXANDER, SERGIUS, and ALEXIS MICHAELOVITCH; and before
the Right-believing Ladies, the Grand Duchess, XENIA ALEXANDROVNA, the
Grand Duchess, MARIA ALEXANDROVNA, and before Her Consort, the Queen of
the Hellenes, OLGA CONSTANTINOVNA, and before Her Consort, the Grand
Duchess, VERA CONSTANTINOVNA, the Grand Duchess, ANASTASIA MICHAELOVNA,
and before Her Consort, the Queen of Würtenburg, OLGA NICOLAEVNA, and
before Her Consort, the Grand Duchess KATHERINE MICHAELOVNA, and the
Grand Duchess HELEN VLADIMIROVNA; and with the Blessing of the Most Holy
Governing SYNOD, this book TREBNIK, hath been printed in the royal
city of Moscow at the Synodal Press in the year of the creation of the
world viicccxc, and of the birth of God the Word according to the flesh
mdccclxxxii, the xth of the indict, the month of June.

[Illustration]




THE DESIGNATION, WITH HOLY GOD, OF THE CHAPTERS CONTAINED IN THIS TREBNIK.


   _Chap._                                                          _Page._

       I. Prayers on the first day after a child is born to a woman     1

      II. Prayer at the signing of a child when it receiveth a name on
            the eighth day after its birth                              4

     III. Prayers for a parturient woman after forty days               6

      IV. Prayer for a woman when she hath aborted a child             11

       V. Prayers at the making of a catechumen                        13

      VI. The order of holy baptism                                    24

          And a prayer for holy baptism, that is, how briefly to
            baptize a child because of fear of death                   41

          Concerning how it behoveth a spiritual person to behave
            himself                                                    44

     VII. The order concerning confession                              46

    VIII. Prayer on the releasing from prohibition                     51

      IX. The order that is used at betrothals                         53

       X. The order of the coronation                                  58

      XI. Prayer at the taking off of the crowns on the eighth day     72

     XII. The order for a second marriage                              73

    XIII. The order of the sanctification of the holy oil              83

     XIV. The office when in extreme urgency occasion ariseth to
            give communion to a sick person                           123

      XV. Prayerful canon to our Lord Jesus Christ and to the most
            holy God-bearing Mother of the Lord at the parting of
            the soul from the body of every right-believer            128

          And the prayer at the departure of a soul                   136

     XVI. The mortuary order over lay bodies                          138

    XVII. The ordinance that is observed concerning the carrying
            forth of them that fall asleep in holy Pascha, and in
            all the bright week                                       164

   XVIII. The mortuary order over a departed priest                   169

     XIX. The office of the burial of a babe                          208

      XX. The order of the lesser sanctification of water             225

     XXI. The order of the sanctification of water on the holy
            Theophany                                                 240

    XXIV. Prayer at the blessing of flesh-meat                        255

     XXV. Prayer at the blessing of cheese and eggs                   256

    XXVI. Prayer at the partaking of grapes on the vith day of august 256

   XXVII. Prayer for them that gather first-fruits                    257

  XXVIII. Prayer at the laying of the foundation of a house           258

    XXIX. Prayer when one entereth into a new house                   258

  XXXIII. Prayer for one that purposeth to go on a journey            259




[Illustration]




_Chapter I._

PRAYERS ON THE FIRST DAY AFTER A CHILD IS BORN TO A WOMAN.


                         Let us pray to the Lord.

Master, Lord Almighty, who healest every sickness, and every weakness; do
thou thyself heal this thine handmaid, _name_, who to-day hath borne a
child, and raise her from the bed upon which she lieth; for, according to
the words of thy prophet David, we were conceived in transgressions, and
are all defiled before thee. Protect her, and this child which she hath
borne: shelter her under the covering of thy wings from this day even
unto her last end, through the prayers of the most holy God-bearing one,
and of all the Saints; for blessed art thou to ages of ages. Amen.

                         Let us pray to the Lord.

Master, Lord our God, who wast born of our most holy Lady, the
God-bearing and ever-virgin Mary, and as a babe wast laid in a manger,
and as a child wast carried in arms; do thou thyself have mercy upon
this thine handmaid, who to-day hath borne this child, and be gracious
unto her voluntary and involuntary offences, and protect her from every
diabolical cruelty; and preserve the child which she hath borne from
every bane, from every harm, from every hostile rage, from evil spirits
of the day and night; and preserve her under thy mighty hand; and grant
unto her a speedy recovery, and cleansing from defilement, and healing
of suffering; and vouchsafe to her health, and strength of soul and
body; and surround her with bright and shining angels; and preserve her
from every approach of invisible spirits; yea, O Lord, from sickness and
infirmity, from jealousy and envy, and from the glance of eyes; and have
mercy upon her, and upon the child, according to the greatness of thy
mercy; and cleanse her from bodily defilement, and from diverse inward
travail befalling her; and, by thy quick mercy, lead her to recovery
in her bodily affliction. And vouchsafe unto the child which she hath
borne to worship the earthly temple which thou hast prepared for the
glorification of thy holy name. For to thee is due all glory, honour, and
worship, to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, now and
ever, and to ages of ages. Amen.

                         Let us pray to the Lord.

O Lord our God, who wast pleased to come down from heaven and to be
born of the holy God-bearing and ever-virgin Mary for the salvation of
us sinners, who knowest the feebleness of human nature; be gracious,
according to the greatness of thy compassions, unto thine handmaid,
_name_, who to-day hath borne a child. For thou hast said, O Lord, Be
fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it. Therefore
we, thy servants, beseech thee, and, trusting in thy forbearing love
to man, with fear invoke the holy name of thy kingdom, Look down from
heaven and behold the feebleness of us condemned ones, and be gracious
unto thine handmaid, _name_, and to all the house in which the child
hath been born, and to all who are connected with her; and to all that
here assemble be thou gracious, as the good and man-loving God. For thou
alone hast power to forgive sins, through the prayers of the most holy
God-bearing one, and of all thy Saints. Amen.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




_Chapter II._

PRAYER AT THE SIGNING OF A CHILD WHEN IT RECEIVETH A NAME ON THE EIGHTH
DAY AFTER ITS BIRTH.


_Be it known that on the eighth day after birth the babe is brought by
the nurse to the temple, and she standeth before the doors of the temple._

                         _And the priest maketh,_

Blessed be our God... _Trisagion._ O most holy Trinity... _And after_ Our
Father... For thine is the kingdom...

_Then the troparion of the day, or of the holy habitation. And the priest
signeth its forehead, mouth, and breast, and saith the prayer._

                         Let us pray to the Lord.

O Lord our God, to thee we pray, and on thee we call, Let the light
of thy countenance be signed on this thy servant (_or_, on this thine
handmaid), _name_, and be he signed with the cross of thine only-begotten
Son in his heart and understanding, that he may flee the vanity of the
world and every evil device of the enemy, and may keep thy commandments;
and grant, O Lord, that thy holy name may remain upon him unrenounced,
when at the fitting time he shall be conjoined with thy holy church, and
be perfected with the terrible mysteries of thy Christ, that, living
according to thy commandments and preserving the seal unbroken, he may
attain unto the blessedness of thine elect in thy kingdom, through the
grace and love to man of thine only-begotten Son, with whom thou art
blessed, together with thy most holy, and good, and life-creating Spirit,
now and ever, and to ages of ages. Amen.

_Then, taking the child in his hands, he standeth before the doors of the
temple, or before the image of the most holy God-bearing one, and maketh
the sign of the cross, saying,_

Hail, grace-accorded God-bearing Virgin! for out of thee the sun of
righteousness, Christ our God, hath shined, enlightening them that are in
darkness. And thou, O righteous elder, be thou glad, receiving in thine
arms the deliverer of our souls, even him that granteth resurrection unto
us.

                       _And the dismissal is made._

_It is necessary to know that, if the newly born babe, being exceedingly
weak, do not suck, but appear likely to die, it behoveth not to wait six
or eight days, and then to baptize it, as some wickedly say; but at the
very hour of its birth to wash it only, and immediately to baptize it,
that it die not unilluminated. Since they that are five months pregnant
are, by the laws and canons, responsible for murder, if it happen that
by any shock they abort the babe, so much the more is it necessary to
avoid the condemnation of them that are brought forth, that they die not
unilluminated._




[Illustration]




_Chapter III._

PRAYERS FOR A PARTURIENT WOMAN AFTER FORTY DAYS.


_On the fortieth day the child is again brought to the temple to be
churched, that is, to make a beginning of attending church. It is brought
by the mother, who hath already been cleansed and washed, accompanied by
the intended sponsor at the baptism._

                         _And the priest maketh,_

Blessed be our God.... _Trisagion._ O most holy Trinity ... _and_ Our
Father.... For thine is the kingdom....

_Then the troparion of the day, or of the commemorated saint._

                            _Glory. Both now._

Through the prayers, O Lord, of all the Saints, and of the God-bearing
one, grant us thy peace, and have mercy upon us, as the alone
compassionate one.

_And she, holding the child, boweth her head, and the priest maketh the
sign of the cross over him, and, touching his head, saith the prayer._

                         Let us pray to the Lord.

O Lord God Almighty, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who by thy word
hast made every rational and irrational creature, and hast led all
things into being from non-existence; to thee we pray, and on thee we
call, Cleanse this thine handmaid, _name_, whom thou hast saved by thy
will, and who cometh into thy holy church, from every sin and from every
defilement, that she may be counted worthy to partake uncondemnedly of
thy holy mysteries.

_Be it known that if the babe be not among the living, the prayer is read
thus far._

                        _Then, with a loud voice,_

For thou art a good and man-loving God....

_But if it be alive, read also this to the end._

Bless also the child which hath been born of her; increase it, sanctify
it, give it understanding, and a prudent and virtuous mind; for thou hast
brought it into being, and hast shewn unto it perceptible light; that at
the time which thou hast appointed it may be counted worthy of spiritual
light, and may be numbered together with thy holy flock, through thine
only-begotten Son, with whom thou art blessed, together with thy most
holy, and good, and life-creating Spirit, now and ever, and to ages of
ages. Amen.

Peace to all.

Bow your heads to the Lord.

                  _Prayer for the mother of the child._

O Lord our God, who didst come for the salvation of the human race;
come also unto thine handmaid, _name_, and, through thine honourable
presbytery, count her worthy of an entrance into the temple of thy
glory: wash her from bodily defilement and from spiritual stain in the
completion of the forty days, and make her worthy of the communion of thy
precious body and blood.

For hallowed and glorified is thy most honourable and majestic name, with
the Father, and the Holy Ghost, now and ever, and to ages of ages. Amen.

_Prayer ii., for the child, which, signing it, the priest prayeth._

                         Let us pray to the Lord.

O Lord our God, who on the fortieth day wast brought as a child into the
temple of the law by Mary, thine unmarried and holy Mother, and wast
carried in the arms of righteous Symeon; do thou thyself, O omnipotent
Master, bless this presented babe, that it may appear before thee, the
Creator of all things; and do thou increase it in every work that is
good and acceptable unto thee, removing far from it every opposing might
by the sign of the likeness of thy cross; for thou art he that guardeth
babes, O Lord; that, being counted worthy of holy baptism, it may attain
unto the part of the elect of thy kingdom, being protected with us by
the grace of the holy, and consubstantial, and undivided Trinity. For to
thee is due all glory, thanksgiving, and worship, with thine unbeginning
Father, and thy most holy, and good, and life-creating Spirit, now and
ever, and to ages of ages. Amen.

Peace to all.

Bow your heads to the Lord.

O God, Father Almighty, who by the loud-voiced prophet Esaias,
hast fore-announced unto us the incarnation from a Virgin of thine
only-begotten Son and our God, who, in the latter days, by thy good
pleasure and by the co-operation of the Holy Ghost, hath willed, through
immeasurable loving-kindness, to become a child of her for the salvation
of us men; and, according to the custom of thy holy law, after the
fulfilment of the days of purification, submitted to be brought into
the sanctuary, being himself a true lawgiver, and willed to be carried
in the arms of righteous Symeon; of which mystery we have a prototype
declared in the aforementioned prophet by the taking of coals with tongs
from the altar, and of which we faithful also have an imitation in grace;
do thou now, who art he that guardeth babes, thyself, O Lord, bless this
child, together with its parents and sponsors, and count it worthy, at
the fitting time, to be born again of water and of the spirit: number it
with thy holy flock of rational sheep, who are called by the name of thy
Christ. For thou art he who livest on high, and who regardest the lowly,
and to thee we ascribe glory, to the Father, and to the Son, and to the
Holy Ghost, now and ever, and to ages of ages. Amen.

_(And if the babe be baptized, the priest performeth the act of reception
into the church; but if not, he doeth this after the baptism. And, after
the prayer, he here maketh the dismissal.) Then, taking the child, the
priest traceth the cross with it before the gates of the temple, saying,_

The servant of God, _name_, or the handmaid of God, _name_, is received
into the church, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost. Amen.

_Then he bringeth it into the temple, saying,_

He entereth into thy house, he worshippeth towards thy holy temple.

_And he bringeth it into the midst of the temple, saying,_

The servant of God, _name_, is received into the church....

                             _Then he saith,_

In the midst of the church he singeth praise unto thee.

_Then he bringeth it before the doors of the altar, saying,_

The servant of God, _name_, is received into the church....

_And he bringeth it into the holy altar, if it be of the male sex; but,
if of the female, only as far as the royal gates, saying,_

Now dismiss thy servant, O Master....

_And after these things he layeth it before the doors of the altar, and
there the sponsor, bowing thrice, taketh it up, and departeth. And the
priest, as is customary, maketh the dismissal._




[Illustration]




_Chapter IV._

PRAYER FOR A WOMAN WHEN SHE HATH ABORTED A CHILD.


_The priest maketh_, Blessed be our God.... _Trisagion._ O most holy
Trinity.... Our Father.... For thine is the kingdom....

_And the troparion of the day. Then,_

                         Let us pray to the Lord.

Master, Lord our God, who wast born of the holy God-bearing and
ever-virgin Mary, and as a babe wast laid in a manger; do thou thyself,
according to thy great mercy, have mercy upon this thine handmaid, who
to-day is in sins, having fallen even unto voluntary or involuntary
murder, and hath aborted that conceived in her; and be gracious unto her
willing and unwilling iniquities, and preserve her from every diabolical
wile, and cleanse her defilement, heal her suffering, and grant unto her,
O lover of mankind, health and strength of body and soul; and guard her
by a shining angel from every assault of invisible demons, yea, O Lord,
from sickness and weakness; and cleanse her from bodily defilement, and
from diverse inward travail befalling her; and, by thine abundant mercy,
rouse her in her humbled body, and raise her from the bed whereon she
lieth. For we were conceived in sins and in transgressions, and are all
defiled before thee, O Lord; and with fear we cry and say, Look down from
heaven and see the helplessness of us accursed, and be gracious unto this
thine handmaid, _name_, who is in sins, having fallen even unto voluntary
or involuntary murder, and hath aborted that conceived in her; and,
according to thy great mercy, as the good and man-loving God, have mercy
upon her and be gracious unto her in all things that have surrounded her
and have come in contact with her; for thou alone hast power to forgive
sins and transgressions, through the prayers of thy most pure Mother, and
all the Saints.

For to thee is due all glory, honour, and worship, with the Father, and
the Holy Ghost, now and ever, and to ages of ages. Amen.

                       _And the dismissal is made._




[Illustration]




_Chapter V._

PRAYERS AT THE MAKING OF A CATECHUMEN.


_The priest looseth the girdle of him that cometh to be illuminated, and
divesteth him of his robes and his shoes, and placeth him looking towards
the east, clad in one garment only, without girdle or head-dress, and
barefooted, and with his hands down; and breatheth thrice in his face,
and signeth him thrice upon the forehead and the breast, and layeth his
hand upon his head, saying,_

                         Let us pray to the Lord.

In thy name, O Lord, God of truth, and in the name of thine only-begotten
Son, and of thy Holy Ghost, I lay mine hand upon thy servant, _name_,
who hath been counted worthy to betake himself to thy holy name, and to
be protected under the shadow of thy wings. Remove far from him that
old error, and fill him with faith that is in thee, and with hope and
charity, that he may understand that thou alone art the true God, and
thine only-begotten Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, and thy Holy Ghost. Grant
him to walk in all thy commandments, and to observe those things which
are acceptable unto thee; for, if a man do these, he shall find life in
them. Inscribe him in thy book of life, and unite him to the flock of
thine inheritance. May thy holy name be glorified in him, and that of thy
beloved Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, and that of thy life-creating Spirit.
Let thine eyes ever regard him in mercy, and thine ears be ever attentive
unto the voice of his prayer. Let him rejoice in the works of his hands,
and in all his generation, that he may give thanks unto thee, worshipping
and glorifying thy great and most high name, and may ever praise thee all
the days of his life,

                              _Exclamation._

For all the powers of heaven praise thee, and thine is the glory, of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, now and ever, and to ages
of ages. Amen.

                            _First exorcism._

                         Let us pray to the Lord.

                        _Choir._ Lord, have mercy.

The Lord forbiddeth thee, O devil, he that came into the world and made
his dwelling among men, that he might cast down thy tyranny, and deliver
men; he that upon the tree triumphed over the opposing powers, when the
sun was darkened, and the earth was shaken, and the tombs were opened,
and the bodies of the saints arose; he that by death destroyed death,
and overcame him that held the might of death, that is, even thee, O
devil. I forbid thee by God, who showeth forth the tree of life, and
rangeth the cherubim, and the flaming sword that turneth about to guard
this. Be thou forbidden! for I forbid thee by him that walketh upon the
waves of the sea as upon dry land, who forbiddeth the storm of winds,
whose glance drieth up the depths, and whose threatenings melt the
mountains; for it is he himself that now forbiddeth thee through us.
Be thou afraid, and depart, and absent thyself from this creature, and
come thou not back, neither hide thyself in him, nor encounter him, nor
influence him, either in the night, or in the day, or in the morning, or
at noon; but get thee away to thine own tartarus, until the appointed
great day of judgment. Fear God, who sitteth upon the cherubim, and
looketh upon the depths, before whom tremble angels, archangels, thrones,
dominations, principalities, virtues, powers, the many-eyed cherubim, and
the six-winged seraphim; whom heaven and earth fear, the sea, and all
that in them is. Get thee away and depart from the sealed newly-elected
soldier of Christ our God; for I forbid thee by him that rideth upon the
wings of the winds, that maketh his angels spirits, and his ministers a
flame of fire; get thee away and depart from this creature with all thy
might and angels.

                              _Exclamation._

For glorified is the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost, now and ever, and to ages of ages. Amen.

                            _Second exorcism._

                         Let us pray to the Lord.

God, the holy, the terrible, and the glorious, who concerning all his
works and strength is incomprehensible and unsearchable, who himself hath
ordained for thee, O devil, the retribution of eternal torment, through
us, his unworthy servants, biddeth thee, and all thy co-operating might
to depart from him that is newly sealed in the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, our true God. I forbid thee therefore, O most evil, and impure,
and foul, and abominable, and alien spirit, by the might of Jesus Christ,
who hath all power in heaven and upon earth, who spake unto the deaf and
dumb demon, Get thee out of the man, and enter no more into him. Depart,
know the vainness of thy might, which had not power even over swine.
Remember him who bade thee, at thy request, enter into the herd of swine.
Fear God, at whose command the earth was stablished upon the waters; who
hath founded the heaven, and fixed the mountains with a line, and the
valleys with a measure; who hath placed the sand as a bound for the sea,
and made a safe path in the raging water; who toucheth the mountains and
they smoke; who investeth himself with light as with a garment; who hath
stretched out the heaven as a curtain; who covereth his upper-chambers
with waters; who hath founded the earth on firm foundations, so that it
shall not be moved for ever; who calleth up the water of the sea, and
poureth it upon the face of the earth. Get thee hence and depart from him
who is being prepared for holy illumination. I forbid thee by the saving
passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by his precious body and blood, and
by his terrible advent; for he shall come, and shall not tarry, to judge
all the earth, and shall punish thee and thy co-operating might in the
gehenna of fire, consigning thee to outer darkness, where the worm dieth
not and the fire is not quenched. For of Christ our God is the might,
with the Father and the Holy Ghost, now and ever, and to ages of ages.
Amen.

                            _Third exorcism._

                         Let us pray to the Lord.

O Lord of Sabaoth, the God of Israel, who healest every sickness and
every wound; look down upon thy servant, search out and try him, and
drive away from him every operation of the devil. Forbid the unclean
spirits, and expel them, and cleanse the work of thy hand, and, using
thy swift efficacy, beat down satan shortly under his feet; and give
him victory over him, and over his unclean spirits; that, obtaining
mercy from thee, he may be counted worthy of thine immortal and heavenly
mysteries, and may ascribe glory unto thee, to the Father, and to the
Son, and to the Holy Ghost, now and ever, and to ages of ages. Amen.

                             _Fourth prayer._

                         Let us pray to the Lord.

Thou that art, Master, Lord, who madest man after thine image and
likeness, and gavest him the power of eternal life, and when he had
fallen through sin didst not disdain him, but didst provide, through
the incarnation of thy Christ, for the salvation of the world; do thou
thyself also, delivering this thy creature from the yoke of the enemy,
receive him into thy heavenly kingdom: open his mental eyes, that the
light of thy gospel may dawn upon him: join to his life a shining angel,
who may deliver him from every adverse snare, from evil encounters, from
the noon-day demon, and from wicked illusions.

_And the priest breatheth on his mouth, on his forehead, and on his
breast, saying,_

Drive from him every evil and unclean spirit, hiding and lurking in his
heart.

                       _And he saith this thrice._

The spirit of error, the spirit of evil, the spirit of idolatry and
of all covetousness, the spirit of lying and of all uncleanness, that
worketh according to the instruction of the devil. And make him a
rational sheep of the holy flock of thy Christ, an honourable member of
thy church, a son and inheritor of thy kingdom; that, living according
to thy commandments, and keeping the seal unbroken, and preserving the
garment undefiled, he may attain unto the blessedness of the saints in
thy kingdom.

                           _With a loud voice._

Through the grace, and compassions, and love to man of thine
only-begotten Son, with whom thou art blessed, together with thy most
holy, and good, and life-creating Spirit, now and ever, and to ages of
ages. Amen.

_And he that is to be baptized, being unvested and barefooted, the priest
turneth him looking towards the west, with his hands uplifted, and saith,_

Dost thou renounce satan, and all his works, and all his angels, and all
his service, and all his pomp?

_And the catechumen answereth, or his sponsor, if he that is to be
baptized be a barbarian, or a child, and saith_, I renounce.

_Again the priest saith a second time,_

Dost thou renounce satan, and all his works, and all his angels, and all
his service, and all his pomp?

_And he answereth_, I renounce.

_Again the priest saith a third time._

Dost thou renounce satan, and all his works, and all his angels, and all
his service, and all his pomp?

_And he answereth_, I renounce.

_Again the priest interrogateth him that is to be baptized._

Hast thou renounced satan?

_And the catechumen answereth, or his sponsor_, I have renounced.

_Again the priest interrogateth,_

Hast thou renounced satan?

_And he answereth_, I have renounced.

_Again the priest interrogateth a third time,_

Hast thou renounced satan?

_And he answereth_, I have renounced.

_Then the priest saith,_

Blow upon him, and spit upon him.

_And this being done, the priest turneth him looking towards the east,
with his hands down; and the priest saith to him,_

Dost thou join Christ?

_And the catechumen answereth, or his sponsor, saying_, I join.

_Again the priest saith a second time,_

Dost thou join Christ?

_He answereth a second time_, I join.

_Again the priest saith a third time,_

Dost thou join Christ?

_He answereth a third time_, I join.

_Then again the priest saith to him,_

Hast thou joined Christ?

_And he answereth_, I have joined.

_And again he saith_, Dost thou believe in him?

_And he saith_, I believe in him, as King and God.

                             _And he saith,_

I believe in one God, the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth, and
of all things visible and invisible. And in one Lord Jesus Christ, the
only-begotten Son of God, who was begotten of the Father before all ages.
Light of Light, very God of very God, begotten, not made, consubstantial
with the Father, by whom all things were made. Who for us men, and for
our salvation, came down from the heavens, and was incarnate of the Holy
Ghost and the Virgin Mary, and was made man; And was crucified also
for us under Pontius Pilate, and suffered, and was buried, and rose
again the third day, according to the scriptures; And ascended into the
heavens, and sitteth at the right hand of the Father; And shall come
again with glory to judge both the quick and the dead, of whose kingdom
there shall be no end. And in the Holy Ghost, the Lord, the giver of
life, who proceedeth from the Father, who with the Father and the Son is
together worshipped and glorified, who spake by the prophets. In one,
holy, catholic, and apostolic church. I acknowledge one baptism for the
remission of sins. I look for the resurrection of the dead; And the life
in the ages to come. Amen.

_And when he hath finished the holy symbol, he also again saith to him,_

Hast thou joined Christ?

_And he answereth_, I have joined.

_And again he saith_, Dost thou believe in him?

_And he saith_, I believe in him as King and God. _And he saith_, I
believe in one God ... _all to the end_.

_And when he hath finished the holy symbol a second time, again he saith
to him a third time,_

Hast thou joined Christ?

_And he answereth_, I have joined.

_And again he saith_, Dost thou believe in him?

_And he saith_, I believe in him, as King and God. _And he saith_, I
believe in one God ... _all to the end._

_And when he hath finished the holy symbol a third time, the priest again
interrogateth him, saying,_

Hast thou joined Christ?

_And he answereth_, I have joined.

_Again the priest interrogateth a second time,_

Hast thou joined Christ?

_And he answereth a second time_, I have joined.

_Again the priest interrogateth a third time,_

Hast thou joined Christ?

_And he answereth a third time_, I have joined.

_And the priest saith_, Bow thyself also unto him.

_And he boweth himself, saying,_

I bow myself to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, to the
consubstantial and undivided Trinity.

                         _Then the priest saith,_

Blessed be God, who desireth that all men should be saved, and come to a
knowledge of the truth, now and ever, and to ages of ages. Amen.

                       _Then he saith this prayer._

                         Let us pray to the Lord.

Master, Lord our God, call thy servant, _name_, to thy holy illumination,
and count him worthy of this great grace of thy holy baptism: put off
from him the old man, and renew him unto everlasting life, and fill him
with the power of thy Holy Ghost, in the unity of thy Christ, that he may
be no longer a child of the body, but a child of thy kingdom; through
the goodwill and grace of thine only-begotten Son, with whom thou art
blessed, together with thy most holy, and good, and life-creating Spirit,
now and ever, and to ages of ages. Amen.




[Illustration]




_Chapter VI._

THE ORDER OF HOLY BAPTISM.


_The priest entereth, and vesteth himself with the white sacerdotal
garment, and the maniples, and all the tapers are lighted, and he taketh
the censer, and goeth to the font and censeth round, and giveth up the
censer, and boweth himself._

                         _Then saith the deacon,_

Bless, master.

                   _And the priest, with a loud voice,_

Blessed be the kingdom of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost, now and ever, and to ages of ages.

_Choir._ Amen.

             _And the deacon straightway saith the ectenia._

In peace let us pray to the Lord.

For the peace that is from above....

For the peace of the whole world....

For this holy temple....

For the Most Holy Governing Synod....

For our Most Pious....

That this water may be hallowed by the might, and operation, and descent
of the Holy Ghost, let us pray to the Lord.

That there may be sent down into it the grace of redemption, the blessing
of Jordan, let us pray to the Lord.

That there may come down into this water the cleansing operation of the
supersubstantial Trinity, let us pray to the Lord.

That we may be illuminated with the illumination of understanding and
piety through the descent of the Holy Ghost, let us pray to the Lord.

That it may be manifested the averting of every counsel of visible and
invisible enemies, let us pray to the Lord.

That he that is baptized therein may be worthy of the incorruptible
kingdom, let us pray to the Lord.

For him that now cometh to holy illumination, and for his salvation, let
us pray to the Lord.

That he may be manifested a son of light, and an inheritor of eternal
good things, let us pray to the Lord.

That he may be planted with, and become a partaker of the death and
resurrection of Christ our God, let us pray to the Lord.

That he may preserve the garment of baptism, and the earnest of the
Spirit undefiled and unblameable in the terrible day of Christ our God,
let us pray to the Lord.

That this water may be to him the bath of regeneration, unto the
forgiveness of sins, and the putting on of incorruption, let us pray to
the Lord.

That the Lord God may hearken unto the voice of our prayer, let us pray
to the Lord.

That he may deliver him and us from all affliction, passion, and want,
let us pray to the Lord.

Help us, save us, have mercy....

Commemorating our most holy, most pure....

_And while the deacon is saying these, the priest saith this prayer to
himself secretly._

O loving-kind and merciful God, who triest the hearts and reins, and who
alone knowest the secrets of men, for nothing is unmanifest before thee,
but all things are naked and exposed in thine eyesight; do thou thyself,
who perceivest that which concerneth me, loathe me not, neither turn
away thy face from me; but overlook mine offences in this hour, O thou
that overlookest the sins of men that they may repent. And wash me from
the defilement of my body and from the stain of my soul, and sanctify
me wholly by thine all-effectual invisible might, and by thy spiritual
right hand, lest, preaching liberty to others, and offering this in the
perfect faith of thine unspeakable love to man, I myself may be condemned
as a servant of sin. Nay, O Master, who alone art good and man-loving,
let me not be turned back humbled; but send unto me power from on high,
and strengthen me for the ministration of this thy present great and most
heavenly mystery; and form the image of thy Christ in him who is about to
be born again through my humility; and build him upon the foundation of
thine apostles and prophets; and cast him not down, but plant him as a
plant of truth in thy holy, catholic, and apostolic church; and pluck him
not up, that, by his advancing in piety, by the same may be glorified thy
most holy name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, now
and ever, and to ages of ages. Amen.

_It behoveth to know that he maketh no exclamation, but saith even the
Amen to himself._

_Then he saith this prayer with a loud voice,_

Great art thou, O Lord, and wonderful are thy works, and no word shall be
sufficient for the praise of thy wonders.

                                                                 _Thrice._

For thou by thy will hast from nothingness brought all things into being,
and by thy power thou sustainest creation, and by thy foreknowledge,
directest the world. Thou from four elements hast formed creation, and
hast crowned the circle of the year with four seasons. All the spiritual
powers tremble before thee, the sun praiseth thee, the moon glorifieth
thee, the stars make intercession with thee, the light hearkeneth unto
thee, the depths shudder at thy presence, the springs of water serve
thee. Thou hast stretched out the heaven as a curtain, thou hast founded
the earth upon the waters, thou hast bounded the sea with sand, thou hast
diffused the air for breathing. The angelic powers minister unto thee,
the choirs of archangels worship thee, the many-eyed cherubim and the
six-winged seraphim, standing and flying around, cover themselves with
fear of thine unapproachable glory. For thou, being the uninscribable,
unbeginning, and unspeakable God, didst come down upon earth, taking
the form of a servant, being made in the likeness of men; for thou, O
Master, through the tenderness of thy mercy, didst not endure to behold
the race of men tormented by the devil, but thou didst come and save
us. We confess thy grace, we proclaim thy mercy, we conceal not thy
beneficence. Thou hast set at liberty the generations of our nature,
thou didst hallow the virginal womb by thy birth. All creation praiseth
thee who didst manifest thyself; for thou, O our God, wast seen upon
earth, and didst dwell together with men. Thou didst hallow the streams
of Jordan, sending down from heaven thy Holy Ghost, and didst crush the
heads of the dragons that lurked therein.

Do thou thyself therefore, O man-loving King, be present now also through
the descent of thy Holy Ghost, and sanctify this water.

                                _Thrice._

And give it the grace of redemption, the blessing of Jordan. Make it a
fountain of incorruption, a gift of sanctification, a loosing of sins,
a healing of sicknesses, a destruction of demons, unapproachable by
hostile powers, fulfilled with angelic strength, and let them that take
counsel together against thy creature flee therefrom; for I have called
upon thy name, O Lord, which is wonderful, and glorious, and terrible to
adversaries.

_And he signeth the water thrice, dipping his fingers therein, and,
breathing upon it, saith,_

Let all the hostile powers be crushed beneath the sign of the image of
thy cross.

                                                                 _Thrice._

We pray thee, O Lord, let every airy and invisible spectre withdraw
itself from us, and let not a demon of darkness conceal himself in this
water, neither let an evil spirit, bringing obscurity of purpose and
rebellious thoughts, descend thereinto with him that is to be baptized.
But thou, O Master of all, declare this water water of redemption,
water of sanctification, a cleansing of flesh and spirit, a loosing of
bonds, a forgiveness of iniquities, an illumination of soul, a bath of
regeneration, a renewal of the spirit, a gift of sonship, a garment of
incorruption, a fountain of life. For thou hast said, O Lord, Wash you,
and be ye clean, put away evil from your souls. Thou hast bestowed upon
us regeneration from on high by water and the spirit. Manifest thyself,
O Lord, in this water, and grant that he that is to be baptized may be
transformed therein to the putting away of the old man, which is corrupt
according to the deceitful lusts, and to the putting on of the new, which
is renewed according to the image of him that created him, that, being
planted in the likeness of thy death through baptism, he may become a
sharer of resurrection; and, preserving the gift of thy Holy Ghost, and
increasing the deposit of grace, he may attain unto the prize of his high
calling, and be counted among the number of the first-born, whose names
are written in heaven, to thee our God and Lord, Jesus Christ, to whom
be glory and might, together with thine unbeginning Father, and with thy
most holy, and good, and life-creating Spirit, now and ever, and to ages
of ages. Amen.

Peace to all.

Bow your heads to the Lord.

_And he breatheth thrice upon the cruet of oil, and signeth this thrice,
while it is held by the deacon, who saith,_

                         Let us pray to the Lord.

                    _And the priest saith the prayer._

Master, Lord, O God of our fathers, who didst send to them that were in
the ark of Noe a dove bearing a twig of olive in its mouth as a sign
of reconciliation and salvation from the flood, and by the same didst
fore-image the mystery of grace, and who hast provided the fruit of the
olive for the completion of thy holy mysteries, and thereby hast filled
them that were under the law with the Holy Ghost, and perfected them
that are under grace; do thou thyself bless this oil by the might, and
operation, and descent of thy Holy Ghost, that it may become an anointing
of incorruption, a shield of righteousness, a renewal of soul and body,
an averting of every diabolical operation, to the removal of all evils
from them that are anointed with it in faith, or that are partakers of
it to thy glory, and to that of thine only-begotten Son, and of thy most
holy, and good, and life-creating Spirit, now and ever, and to ages of
ages.

_Choir._ Amen.

_Deacon._ Let us attend.

_And the priest, singing Alleluia thrice with the people, maketh three
crosses with the oil upon the water._

                          _Then he exclaimeth,_

Blessed be God, who enlighteneth and sanctifieth every man that cometh
into the world, now and ever, and to ages of ages.

_Choir._ Amen.

_And he that is to be baptized is brought forward; and the priest taketh
of the oil with two fingers, and maketh the sign of the cross on his
forehead, and breast, and between his shoulders, saying,_

The servant of God, _name_, is anointed with the oil of gladness, in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, now and ever,
and to ages of ages. Amen.

_And he signeth his breast and between the shoulders. On the breast
saying,_

For the healing of soul and body.

_And on the ears_, For the hearing of faith.

_On the hands_, Thy hands have made me, and fashioned me.

_On the feet_, That he may walk in the path of thy commandments.

_And when he hath anointed the whole body, the priest baptizeth him,
holding him erect and looking towards the east, saying,_

The servant of God, _name_, is baptized in the name of the Father. Amen.
And of the Son. Amen. And of the Holy Ghost. Amen. Now and ever, and to
ages of ages. Amen.

_At each invocation he immerseth him, and raiseth him again. And after
the baptism the priest washeth his hands, singing with the people psalm
xxxi._

Blessed are they whose transgressions....

_And this whole psalm is said thrice; and, vesting him with the robe, he
saith,_

The servant of God, _name_, is invested with the robe of righteousness,
in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.

                _And the troparion is sung in tone viii._

Give unto me a shining robe, thou that art invested with light as with a
garment, O most merciful Christ our God.

_And after investing him, the priest prayeth, saying this prayer._

Blessed art thou, O Lord God Almighty, fountain of good things, sun
of righteousness, who shinest to them that are in darkness the light
of salvation, through the manifestation of thine only-begotten Son,
and our God, and grantest unto us, unworthy ones, blessed cleansing in
holy water, and divine sanctification in life-effecting anointing; and
who art now well-pleased for thy servant, the newly-illuminated, to
be born again through water and the spirit, and who grantest unto him
remission of voluntary and involuntary sins; do thou thyself, O Master,
thou loving-kind supreme King, bestow upon him also the seal of thine
omnipotent and adorable Holy Ghost, and the communion of the holy body
and the precious blood of thy Christ; keep him in thy sanctification,
confirm him in the orthodox faith; deliver him from the evil one and all
his devices; and preserve his soul, through thy saving fear, in purity
and righteousness, that, in every work and word, being acceptable unto
thee, he may become a son and heir of thine heavenly kingdom.

_With a loud voice._ For thou art our God, the God of mercy and
salvation, and to thee we ascribe glory, to the Father, and to the Son,
and to the Holy Ghost, now and ever, and to ages of ages. Amen.

_And, after the prayer, he anointeth the baptized with the holy myrrh,
making the sign of the cross, On the forehead, and eyes, and nostrils,
and lips, And both ears, and breast, And hands, and feet, and saying,_

The seal of the gift of the Holy Ghost. Amen.

_Then the priest maketh, together with the sponsor and the child, a
circumambulation. And we sing,_

As many as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. Alleluia,
_thrice_.

                     _Then the prokimenon, tone iii._

The Lord is mine illumination, and my saviour, whom shall I fear?

_Verse._ The Lord is the defence of my life, of whom shall I be afraid?

                _The epistle to the Romans, section xci._

Brethren, as many of us as were baptized.... _ending_, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.[9]

_Priest._ Peace to thee.

_Deacon._ Wisdom, let us attend.

_Reader._ Alleluia.

_After this the deacon._ Wisdom, standing, let us hear the holy gospel.

_Priest._ The reading of the holy gospel from Matthew.

_Deacon._ Let us attend.

_The priest readeth, section cxvi._ At that time, the eleven
disciples.... _ending_, the end of the world. Amen.[10]

                           _Then the ectenia._

Have mercy upon us, O God....

Furthermore let us pray for our Most Pious Autocratic Great Lord, THE
EMPEROR ALEXANDER ALEXANDROVITCH of all Russia.

Furthermore let us pray for His Consort, the Most Pious Lady, THE EMPRESS
MARIA THEODOROVNA.

Furthermore let us pray for His Heir, the Right-believing Lord, the
Cesarevitch and Grand Duke, NICOLAUS ALEXANDROVITCH.

Furthermore let us pray for the Most Holy Governing Synod.

Furthermore let us pray for mercy, life, peace, health, salvation, and
forgiveness of sins for the servant of God, _name_, the sponsor.

Furthermore let us pray for the newly-illuminated servant of God, _name_.

That he may be preserved in the faith of a pure confession, in all piety,
and in the fulfilment of the commandments of Christ throughout all the
days of his life.

For a merciful and man-loving God thou art....

_Choir._ Amen.

_Priest._ Glory to thee, O Christ God, our hope, glory to thee.

                            _Glory. Both now._

Lord, have mercy, _thrice_. Bless.

                  _And the priest maketh the dismissal._

_Note. And on the eighth day they bring him again to the church for the
ablution. And the priest looseth his garment and girdle, saying these
prayers._

                         Let us pray to the Lord.

                        _Choir._ Lord, have mercy.

Thou that by holy baptism hast granted forgiveness of sins unto thy
servant, and bestowed upon him a life of regeneration; do thou thyself,
O Master Lord, be pleased that the light of thy countenance may evermore
shine in his heart, Keep the escutcheon of his faith undefamed by
enemies: preserve for him the garment of incorruption, which he hath put
on, undefiled and unstained: preserve unbroken in him the spiritual seal
by thy grace; and be gracious unto him and unto us, according to the
plenitude of thy compassions.

For blessed and glorified is thy most honourable and majestic name, of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, now and ever, and to
ages of ages. Amen.

                               _Prayer ii._

                         Let us pray to the Lord.

                        _Choir._ Lord, have mercy.

Master, Lord our God, who, through the font, bestowest heavenly
illumination upon them that are baptized, who hast regenerated thy
servant, the newly-illuminated, by water and the spirit, and bestowed
upon him forgiveness of his voluntary and involuntary sins; do thou lay
upon him thy mighty hand, and keep him in the power of thy goodness;
preserve his pledge inviolate, and count him worthy of eternal life, and
of thine approval.

For thou art our sanctification, and to thee we ascribe glory, to the
Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, now and ever, and to ages
of ages.

_Choir._ Amen.

Peace to all.

_Choir._ And to thy spirit.

_Deacon._ Bow your heads to the Lord.

_Choir._ To thee, O Lord.

He that hath put on thee, O Christ our God, with us boweth his head to
thee; and do thou keep him that he may abide a combatant unovercome
against them that bear vain enmity against him and us, and by thy crown
of incorruption at the last declare us all to be victorious ones. For
it is thine to have mercy and to save, and to thee we ascribe glory,
with thine unbeginning Father, and with thy most holy, and good, and
life-creating Spirit, now and ever, and to ages of ages.

_Choir._ Amen.

_And he looseneth the child’s girdle and garment, and, joining the ends
of these, soaketh them with clean water, and sprinkleth the child,
saying,_

Thou art justified. Thou art illuminated. Thou art sanctified. Thou art
washed, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by the Spirit of our
God.

_And he taketh a new sponge dipped in water, and wipeth his face, as also
his head, and breast, and the rest, saying,_

Thou art baptized. Thou art illuminated. Thou art anointed with myrrh.
Thou art sanctified. Thou art washed. In the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.

                   _Prayer at the tonsure of the hair._

_Deacon._ Let us pray to the Lord.

_Choir._ Lord have mercy.

Master, Lord our God, who didst honour man with thine image, providing
him with a rational soul and comely body, that the body might serve the
rational soul; for thou didst place the head in superiority, and therein
emplant the greater number of the senses, which impede not one another,
and didst cover the head with hair that it might not be injured by the
changes of weather, and didst fit all the members serviceably thereunto,
that by all it might render thanks unto thee, the excellent artist; do
thou thyself, O Master, who, by thy chosen vessel, Paul, the apostle,
hast bidden us to do all things to thy glory, bless thy servant, _name_,
who is come to make the first offering by the cutting of the hair of
his head; and with him also his sponsors; and grant unto them all that
they may exercise themselves in thy law, and do those things that are
acceptable unto thee.

For a merciful and man-loving God thou art, and to thee we ascribe glory,
to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, now and ever, and
to ages of ages.

_Choir._ Amen.

Peace to all.

_Choir._ And to thy spirit.

_Deacon._ Bow your heads to the Lord.

_Choir._ To thee, O Lord.

                   _And the priest saith this prayer._

O Lord our God, who, through the completion of the bath, hast, by thy
goodness, sanctified them that believe in thee; do thou bless the present
child, and may thy blessing come down upon his head. And as by Samuel the
prophet thou didst bless David the King, so also bless the head of thy
servant, _name_, by the hand of me, a sinner, visiting him with thy Holy
Ghost, that he may increase unto maturity, and in the grey hairs of old
age may ascribe glory unto thee, and may see the good things of Jerusalem
all the days of his life.

For to thee is due all glory, honour, and worship, to the Father, and to
the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, now and ever, and to ages of ages.

_Choir._ Amen.

_And he sheareth him in the form of a cross, saying,_

The servant of God, _name_, is shorn, in the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

                                                            _Choir._ Amen.

_Then the ectenia, in which after THE EMPEROR, the sponsor is
commemorated together with the newly-illuminated._

Have mercy upon us, O God, according to thy great mercy....

Furthermore let us pray for mercy, life, peace, health, and for the
salvation of the servant of God, _name_, the sponsor, and, _name_, the
newly-illuminated.

_Priest._ For a merciful....

                  _And the customary dismissal is made._




[Illustration]




A PRAYER FOR HOLY BAPTISM, THAT IS, HOW BRIEFLY TO BAPTIZE A CHILD
BECAUSE OF FEAR OF DEATH.


_The priest saith_, Blessed be the kingdom.... _Then_, Trisagion. O most
holy Trinity.... Our Father.... For thine is....

                         Let us pray to the Lord.

Lord God Almighty, the author of all creation, visible and invisible, who
didst make heaven and earth, and the sea, and all that in them is, who
didst gather the waters unto one gathering together, who didst shut up
the depth and seal it by thy terrible and glorious name, who didst raise
up the waters to be above the firmament: thou hast founded the earth upon
the waters, thou hast stablished the sea by thy power, thou hast crushed
the heads of the dragons in the waters: terrible art thou, and who shall
oppose thee? Do thou, O Lord, regard this thy creature, and this water,
and give it the grace of redemption, the blessing of Jordan: make it a
fount of incorruption, a gift of sanctification, a loosing of sins, a
healing of sicknesses, a destruction of demons, an inaccessibility to
hostile powers, a fulness of angelic strength, that they may flee from it
that plot against thy creature; for I have called upon thy name, O Lord,
which is wonderful and glorious, and terrible to adversaries.

_And straightway he poureth oil upon the water. Then he baptizeth,
saying,_

The servant of God is baptized.... _And the rest._

_And straightway he investeth him, and anointeth him with the myrrh,
saying,_

The seal of the gift.... _And the rest._

_And after these things he goeth round with him, singing according to
rule,_

As many as have been baptized into Christ....

                       _And the dismissal is made._

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




PREFACE AND INSTRUCTION CONCERNING HOW IT BEHOVETH A SPIRITUAL PERSON TO
BEHAVE HIMSELF, AND TO INSTRUCT WITHOUT CONTRADICTION THEM THAT BETAKE
THEMSELVES TO HIM.


It is the duty of him that is the recipient of human thoughts to be a
pattern of all good things, and to be continent, humble, and virtuous,
praying himself every hour unto God, that he may give him the word of
wisdom to correct them that betake themselves to him. First of all it
is his duty himself to fast wednesday and friday throughout the year,
as the divine canons direct, since from these he hath to direct himself
and others what to do. But if he himself be ignorant, incontinent, and
pleasure-loving, how can he teach virtue unto others? and who would be
so unwise as to hearken unto him concerning that which he hath to say,
seeing him a disorderly person and a drunkard, and teaching others not
to be intemperate, or to follow any virtue whatever, while he himself
is unable to do this? For eyes are more believing than ears, saith the
divine scripture. Therefore, take heed unto thyself, O thou that art a
spiritual person; for if one sheep be lost through thy negligence, it
shall be required at thy hands. For cursed, saith the scripture, is he
that doeth the work of the Lord negligently. And the great Basil saith,
Give heed, that thou fear not a man in his fall, that thou give not the
Son of God into unworthy hands, that thou be not ashamed of him because
of them that are glorious on the earth, and that thou communicate not
even him that weareth a diadem. For the divine canons do not permit the
unworthy to be communicated, since they are regarded as heathen. If
they will not repent, woe unto them, and to them that communicate them.
Give heed, he saith, thou seest I will not permit such things. These
and the like precepts keeping, and before all things, preserving the
ecclesiastical dogmas immoveably, thou shalt save thyself, and them that
hearken unto thee. If any without proper licence from the local Bishop
dare to be the recipient of thoughts and to confess, such shall rightly
receive punishment as a transgressor of the divine canons; for he doth
not only ruin himself, but as many as are confessed by him, they are not
confessed, and as many as are bound or loosed, they are not corrected,
according to the sixth canon of the synod of Carthage, and according to
the forty-third of the same synod.




[Illustration]




_Chapter VII._

THE ORDER CONCERNING CONFESSION.


_The spiritual father leadeth one that cometh to confess, but not two or
more, with uncovered head before an icon of our Lord Jesus Christ. And he
maketh the initial verse._

_Then_, Trisagion. _After_ Our Father.... Lord have mercy, _xii_.

                            _Glory. Both now._

O come, let us worship.... _Thrice._

_Then Psalm l._ Have mercy upon me, O God....

                  _And these present troparia, tone vi._

Have mercy upon us, O Lord, have mercy upon us; for, destitute of all
defence, we sinners offer unto thee, as Master, this prayer, Have mercy
upon us.

                                 _Glory._

O Lord, have mercy upon us; for we have put our trust in thee. Be not
exceedingly wroth against us, neither remember our transgressions; but,
as being loving-kind, look now upon us, and deliver us from our enemies;
for thou art our God, and we are thy people, we are all the work of thy
hand, and we call upon thy name.

                               _Both now._

Open unto us the gates of loving-kindness, O blessed God-bearing one,
that we perish not who put our trust in thee, but through thee may we be
delivered from calamities; for thou art the salvation of the christian
race.

                      _Then_, Lord have mercy, _xl_.

               _The priest saith_, Let us pray to the Lord.

                            _And this prayer._

O God, our Saviour, who, by thy prophet Nathan, didst grant remission
of his sins to the repentant David, and didst accept the penitent
prayer of Manasse; do thou thyself, in thy wonted love to man, accept
this thy servant, _name_, who lamenteth because of those iniquities
which he hath wrought, overlooking all that he hath done, forgiving his
unrighteousness, and passing-by his transgressions. For thou, O Lord,
hast said that pleasure thou hast not in the death of a sinner, but
rather that he should return and live; and that sins shall be forgiven
until seventy times seven. For as thy greatness is incomparable, so
is thy mercy immeasurable. For if thou shouldest mark transgressions,
who should stand? For thou art the God of the penitent, and to thee we
ascribe glory, to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, now
and ever, and to ages of ages. Amen.

                         Let us pray to the Lord.

                          _And another prayer._

O Lord Jesus Christ, Son of the living God, the shepherd, and the lamb
that taketh away the sins of the world, who didst give remittance unto
the two debtors, and grant pardon of her sins unto the harlot; do thou
thyself, O Master, concede, forgive, and pardon the sins, transgressions,
and the voluntary and involuntary offences, which, in knowledge and in
ignorance, thy servants have wrought, and whatsoever they have done,
as men bearing flesh and living in the world, being beguiled by the
devil. If by word, or by deed, or in knowledge, or in ignorance they
have sinned, or have despised the word of a priest, or are under the
malediction of a priest, or are fallen under their own anathema, or are
bound under an oath; do thou thyself, as the good Master, who requitest
not evil, be pleased that these, thy servants, be loosed by the word,
forgiving them their own anathema and oath, according to the greatness
of thy mercy. Yea, O Master, thou man-loving Lord, hearken unto us
beseeching thy grace for these thy servants; and, as the most merciful
one, overlook all their offences, and deliver them from everlasting
torment. For thou, O Master, hast said, Whatsoever ye shall bind on
earth shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth
shall be loosed in heaven. For thou alone art without sin, and to thee we
ascribe glory, to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, now
and ever, and to ages of ages. Amen.

                      _After this he saith to him,_

Behold, child, Christ invisibly standeth here to hear thy confession. Be
not ashamed, neither be afraid, and hide nothing from me; but fear not to
tell me all that thou hast done, so that thou mayest receive forgiveness
from our Lord Jesus Christ. Behold, his image is before us, and I am only
the witness, that I may bear witness before him of all thou tellest me.
If thou hidest anything from me thou hast double sin. Bethink thee then;
for since thou art come unto the place of the physician, go not thou away
unhealed.

_And then he interrogateth him minutely, question by question, and
waiteth until he answer after each interrogation._[11]

                              _Admonition._

Concerning all these things thou art bound henceforth to take care;
since, according to the christian mystery, thou art baptized with a
second baptism, and, God helping thee, do thou make a good beginning.
And, above all things, make thou not light of it, to return to the same
things, lest thou become a derision unto men; for this becometh not
christians: but live honourably, and righteously, and devoutly, and may
God assist thee by his grace.

_And when thou hast said all these things unto him, and hast carefully
examined him, and he hath moreover made answer without concealment of all
things concerning himself, say thou also unto him_, Bow thyself. _Then he
that hath confessed boweth his head._

              _And the spiritual person saith this prayer._

                         Let us pray to the Lord.

O Lord God of the salvation of thy servants, who art merciful, and
compassionate and long-suffering, and repentest thee concerning our
miseries, who desirest not the death of a sinner, but that he should
return and live; do thou thyself now be merciful unto thy servant,
_name_, and grant unto him an image of repentance, pardon and remission
of sins; and forgive him every voluntary and involuntary offence:
reconcile and unite him to thy holy church, through Christ Jesus our
Lord, with whom is due to thee might and majesty, now and ever, and to
ages of ages. Amen.

_After this prayer the priest absolveth the penitent, who lowly
kneeleth, saying on this wise, to the completion of the mystery of holy
penitence,_

Our Lord and God, Jesus Christ, by the grace and compassion of his love
to man, forgive thee, child, _name_, all thine iniquities; and I, an
unworthy priest, by the power that is given unto me, forgive thee and
loosen thee from all thy sins, in the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.

_And finally, the priest, while saying the absolution, signeth the
penitent with his right hand with the sign of the cross._

_Then_, It is very meet.... Glory. Both now. _And the dismissal._[12]




[Illustration]




_Chapter VIII._

PRAYER ON THE RELEASING FROM PROHIBITION.


O benign Lord, good and man-loving, who, for thy mercy’s sake, didst send
thine only-begotten Son into the world that he might tear in pieces the
accusation of offences against us, and burst the bonds of them that are
bound by sin, and preach deliverance unto the captives; do thou thyself,
O Master, by thy grace, deliver thy servant, _name_, from the bond that
lieth upon him, and grant unto him that, in every time and place, he may
without sin draw nigh with boldness unto thy majesty, and, in a pure
conscience, entreat the rich mercy that is from thee.

For a merciful and man-loving God thou art, and to thee we ascribe glory,
to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, now and ever, and
to ages of ages. Amen.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




_Chapter IX._

THE ORDER THAT IS USED AT BETROTHALS.


_After the divine liturgy, while the priest standeth in the sanctuary,
they that purpose to be joined together stand before the holy doors, the
man on the right side and the woman on the left. And on the right side of
the holy table are laid their two rings, a golden one and a silver one,
the silver one towards the right and the golden one towards the left,
close to one another. And the priest signeth the heads of the bridal
pair thrice, and giveth them burning tapers, and leadeth them within the
temple, and censeth crosswise, and by the deacon is said,_

Bless, master.

_And the priest._ Blessed be Our God....

_Choir._ Amen.

_Deacon._ In peace let us pray to the Lord.

For the peace that is from above, and for the salvation of their two....

For the peace of the whole world, the good estate....

For this holy temple, and for them that with faith....

For the most holy governing Synod....

For our Most Pious....

For the servant of God, _name_, and for the handmaid of God, _name_, who
are now being betrothed to one another, and for their salvation, let us
pray to the Lord.

That there may be vouchsafed unto them children for the succession of
generation, and all desires that tend to salvation, let us pray to the
Lord.

That there may be sent down upon them perfect love, peace, and
assistance, let us pray to the Lord.

That they may be preserved in unanimity, and stedfast faith, let us pray
to the Lord.

That they may be blessed with a blameless course of life, let us pray to
the Lord.

That the Lord our God may grant unto them an honourable marriage, and a
bed undefiled, let us pray to the Lord.

For our deliverance from all affliction....

Commemorating our most holy, most pure, most blessed....

                                _Priest._

For to thee is due all glory....

              _Then he saith the prayer with a loud voice._

O God eternal, who bringest things that are divided unto unity, and
imposest upon these an indissoluble bond of love, who didst bless Isaac
and Rebecca, and declare them to be the inheritors of thy promise; do
thou thyself bless these thy servants, _name_, _name_, directing them in
every good work. For a merciful and man-loving God thou art, and to thee
we ascribe glory, to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost,
now and ever, and to ages of ages.

_Choir._ Amen.

_Priest._ Peace to all.

_Choir._ And to thy spirit.

_Deacon._ Bow your heads to the Lord.

_Choir._ To thee, O Lord.

                                _Priest._

O Lord our God, who hast espoused the church as a pure virgin from among
the gentiles; do thou bless these espousals, and unite and keep these thy
servants in peace and unanimity.

For to thee is due all glory, honour, and worship, to the Father, and to
the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, now and ever, and to ages of ages.

_Choir._ Amen.

_Then the priest, taking the rings, giveth first the golden one to the
man, then the silver one to the woman._

                        _And he saith to the man,_

The servant of God, _name_, is betrothed to the handmaid of God, _name_,
in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.

                      _Then to the woman he saith,_

The handmaid of God, _name_, is betrothed to the servant of God, _name_,
in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.

_And when he hath thus spoken to each one thrice, he maketh a cross with
the rings upon their heads, and placeth them on the fingers of their
right hands. Then the sponsor changeth the rings of the bridal pair._

                      _The priest saith the prayer._

                         Let us pray to the Lord.

O Lord, our God, who didst accompany the servant of the patriarch Abraham
to Mesopotamia, when he was sent to espouse a wife for his lord Isaac,
and didst reveal to him by means of the drawing of water to betroth
Rebecca; do thou thyself bless the betrothal of thy servants, this,
_name_, and this, _name_, and confirm the word that hath been spoken by
them, confirm them by the holy union that is from thee; for thou from the
beginning hast created male and female, and by thee a woman is conjoined
to a man, for assistance and for the succession of the generation of
man. Therefore, O Lord our God, who hast sent forth thy truth unto thine
inheritance, and thy promise unto thy servants, our fathers, even thine
elect in every generation, do thou thyself regard thy servant, _name_,
and thine handmaid, _name_, and confirm their betrothal in faith, and
unanimity, and truth, and love. For thou, O Lord, hast declared that
troth should be given and confirmed in everything. By a ring was given
might unto Joseph in Egypt; by a ring Daniel was exalted in the land
of Babylon; by a ring was revealed the truth of Thamar; by a ring our
heavenly Father showed compassion upon his son; for, said he, Put ye a
ring upon his right hand, and kill the fatted calf, and let us eat and
rejoice. Thine own right hand, O Lord, armed Moses in the red sea; for,
by thy true word, the heavens were established and the earth firmly
founded, and the right hand of thy servants shall be blessed by thy
mighty word, and by thine uplifted arm. Therefore, O Master, do thou
thyself now bless this putting on of rings with thy heavenly benediction;
and may thine Angel go before them all the days of their life.

For thou art he that blesseth and sanctifieth all things, and to thee we
ascribe glory, to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, now
and ever, and to ages of ages. Amen.

                  _Straightway the deacon this ectenia._

Furthermore let us pray for our Most Pious, Autocratic, Great Lord, THE
EMPEROR ALEXANDER ALEXANDROVITCH of all Russia.

Furthermore let us pray for His Consort, the Most Pious Lady, THE EMPRESS
MARIA THEODOROVNA.

Furthermore let us pray for His Heir, the Right-believing Lord, the
Cesarevitch and Grand Duke, NICOLAUS ALEXANDROVITCH.

Furthermore let us pray for the Most Holy Governing Synod.

Furthermore let us pray for all Their christ-loving army.

Furthermore let us pray for the servants of God, _name_, and _name_, who
are being betrothed to one another.

_Choir._ Lord have mercy, _thrice_.

Furthermore let us pray for the whole brotherhood....

                              _Exclamation._

For a merciful and man-loving God thou art, and to thee we ascribe glory,
to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, now and ever, and
to ages of ages. Amen.

                          _Then the dismissal._




[Illustration]




_Chapter X._

THE ORDER OF THE CORONATION.


_Now if at the same time they desire to be crowned, they go into the
temple with burning tapers, preceded by the priest with the censer, and
singing psalm cxxvii thus. And the people say after each verse,_

_Glory to thee, O our God, glory to thee._

Blessed are all they that fear the Lord.

_Glory to thee, O our God, glory to thee._

They that walk in his ways.

_Glory to thee, O our God, glory to thee._

Thou shalt eat the fruit of thy labours.

_Glory to thee, O our God, glory to thee._

Blessed art thou, and it shall be well with thee.

_Glory to thee, O our God, glory to thee._

Thy wife shall be as a fruitful vine on the gables of thine house.

_Glory to thee, O our God, glory to thee._

Thy sons shall be as newly-planted olive trees round about thy table.

_Glory to thee, O our God, glory to thee._

Lo, thus shall the man be blessed that feareth the Lord.

_Glory to thee, O our God, glory to thee._

The Lord shall bless thee out of Sion, and thou shalt see the good things
of Jerusalem all the days of thy life.

_Glory to thee, O our God, glory to thee._

And thou shalt see thy son’s sons: peace be upon Israel.

_Glory to thee, O our God, glory to thee._

_After this the priest saith a word of instruction, telling them what is
the mystery of marriage, and how in marriage they have to live acceptably
unto God, and honourably. And after the conclusion of this, the priest
interrogateth the bridegroom, saying,_

Hast thou, _name_, a good and unconstrained will, and a firm intention
to take unto thyself this woman, _name_, whom here thou seest before thee?

_And the bridegroom answereth, saying_, I have, reverend father.

_The priest again_, Thou hast not vowed thyself to another bride?

_Bridegroom._ I have not vowed myself, reverend father.

_And straightway the priest, regarding the bride, interrogateth her,
saying_, Hast thou a good and unconstrained will, and a firm intention to
take unto thyself this man, _name_, whom thou seest here before thee?

_And the bride answereth, saying_, I have, reverend father.

_The priest again_, Thou hast not vowed thyself to another man?

_And the bride answereth_, I have not vowed myself, reverend father.

_Then the deacon saith_, Bless, master.

_Priest._ Blessed be the kingdom....

_Choir._ Amen.

                          _Deacon, the ectenia._

In peace let us pray to the Lord.

For the peace that is from above....

For the peace of the whole world....

For this holy temple....

For the Most Holy Governing Synod.

For our Most Pious....

For the servants of God, _name_, _name_, who are now being conjoined to
one another in the community of marriage, and for their salvation, let us
pray to the Lord.

That this marriage may be blessed as was that in Cana of Galilee, let us
pray to the Lord.

That there may be vouchsafed unto them chastity, and fruit of the womb
for their benefit, let us pray to the Lord.

That they may be rejoiced in the beholding of sons and daughters, let us
pray to the Lord.

That there may be granted unto them the acquisition of fair children, and
a blameless course of life, let us pray to the Lord.

That there may be granted unto them and unto us all desires that tend
unto salvation, let us pray to the Lord.

For their deliverance and ours from every affliction.

Help us, save us, have mercy....

Commemorating our most holy, most pure, most blessed....

                       _Priest, with a loud voice,_

For to thee is due all glory....

_Choir._ Amen.

_Deacon._ Let us pray to the Lord.

_Choir._ Lord have mercy.

              _The priest, with a loud voice, this prayer._

O God most pure, and the Author of all creation, who, through thy love
to man, didst transform a rib of Adam the forefather into a woman, and
didst bless them, and say, Increase and multiply, and have dominion over
the earth, and, by the conjoining, didst declare them both to be one
member; for because of this a man shall forsake his father and mother,
and shall cleave unto his wife, and the two shall be in one flesh; and
whom God hath joined together let man not put asunder; who didst also
bless thy servant Abraham, and open the womb of Sara, and didst make him
the father of many nations; who didst bestow Isaac upon Rebecca, and
didst bless her offspring; who didst join Jacob unto Rachel, and from
them didst make manifest the twelve patriarchs; who didst yoke Joseph
and Aseneth together, and as the fruit of generation didst bestow upon
them Ephrem and Manasse; who didst accept Zacharias and Elizabeth, and
didst declare their offspring the Forerunner; who out of the root of
Jesse, according to the flesh, didst produce the Ever-Virgin, and from
her wast incarnate and wast born for the salvation of the human race; who
through thine unspeakable grace and plenteous goodness, wast present in
Cana of Galilee, and didst bless the marriage there, that thou mightest
show that a lawful union, and a generation therefrom is according to thy
will. Do thou thyself, O most holy Master, accept the prayer of us, thy
servants, and, with thine invisible presence being here, as there, do
thou bless this marriage, and give unto thy servants, _name_, _name_, a
peaceful life, length of days, chastity, love for one another in the bond
of peace, a long-lived seed, grace upon their children, and an unfading
crown of glory. Count them worthy to see their children’s children;
preserve their bed undefiled; and give them of the dew of heaven from
above, and of the fatness of the earth. Fill their houses with corn, wine
and oil, and with every bounty, that they may have to give to them that
are in need, bestowing also unto them that are here assembled with us all
desires that tend to salvation.

For a merciful, and compassionate, and man-loving God thou art, and to
thee we ascribe glory, with thine unbeginning Father, and thy most holy,
and good, and life-creating Spirit, now and ever, and to ages of ages.

_Choir._ Amen.

_Deacon._ Let us pray to the Lord.

_Choir._ Lord, have mercy.

               _The priest this prayer with a loud voice._

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, thou hierurgist of mystical and pure
marriage and lawgiver of that of the body, thou guardian of incorruption,
thou good provider of the means of life. Do thou thyself now, O Master,
who in the beginning didst create man, and appoint him as the king of
creation, and say, It is not good for man to be alone upon the earth,
let us make him a helpmeet for him; and, taking one of his ribs, didst
make woman, whom when Adam saw he said, This now is bone of my bones, and
flesh of my flesh: she shall be called woman, for she was taken out of
her man: for this cause a man shall forsake his father and mother, and
cleave unto his wife, and two shall be in one flesh: and whom God hath
joined, let not man divide: do thou thyself now, O Master, Lord our God,
send down thy heavenly grace upon these thy servants, _name_, _name_, and
grant unto this thine handmaid to be in all things subject unto the man,
and to this thy servant to be at the head of the woman, that they may
live according unto thy will. Bless them, O Lord our God, as thou didst
bless Abraham and Sara. Bless them, O Lord our God, as thou didst bless
Isaac and Rebecca. Bless them, O Lord our God, as thou didst bless Jacob,
and all the patriarchs. Bless them, O Lord our God, as thou didst bless
Joseph and Aseneth. Bless them, O Lord our God, as thou didst bless Moses
and Sepphora. Bless them, O Lord our God, as thou didst bless Joakim
and Anna. Bless them, O Lord our God, as thou didst bless Zacharias and
Elizabeth. Preserve them, O Lord our God, as thou didst preserve Noe in
the ark. Preserve them, O Lord our God, as thou didst preserve Jonas
in the belly of the whale. Preserve them, O Lord our God, as thou didst
preserve the three holy children from the fire, sending down upon them
dew from heaven; and may that joy come upon them which the blessed Helen
had when she found the precious cross. Remember them, O Lord our God,
as thou didst remember Enoch, Sem, and Elias. Remember them, O Lord our
God, as thou didst remember thy holy forty martyrs, sending down upon
them crowns from heaven. Remember, O God, the parents who have reared
them; for the prayers of parents confirm the foundation of houses.
Remember, O Lord our God, thy servants, the paranymphs, who are present
at this rejoicing. Remember, O Lord our God, thy servant, _name_, and
thine handmaid, _name_, and bless them. Give them fruit of the womb,
fair children, and unanimity of soul and body. Exalt them as the cedars
of Libanus, and as a well-cultured vine. Bestow upon them seed of corn,
that, having every sufficiency, they may abound in every work that is
good and acceptable unto thee; and let them behold their sons’ sons as
newly planted olive-trees round about their table, and, being accepted
before thee, may they shine as the luminaries in heaven unto thee, our
Lord. And, together with thee, be glory, might, honour, and worship, to
thine unbeginning Father, and to thy life-creating Spirit, now and ever,
and to ages of ages.

_Choir._ Amen.

_Deacon._ Let us pray to the Lord.

_Choir._ Lord, have mercy.

              _And again the priest saith this prayer with a
                               loud voice._

O holy God, who didst form man from the dust, and from his rib didst
fashion woman, and yoke her unto him a helpmeet for him, because so it
was seemly unto thy majesty for man not to be alone upon the earth;
do thou thyself now, O Master, stretch forth thy hand from thy holy
dwelling-place, and conjoin this thy servant, _name_, and this thine
handmaid, _name_; for by thee a woman is conjoined unto a man. Yoke them
together in unanimity, crown them in one flesh, bestow on them fruit of
the womb, and the gain of well-favoured children.

For thine is the might, and thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the
glory, of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, now and
ever, and to ages of ages.

_Choir._ Amen.

_And after the Amen the priest, taking the crowns, crowneth first the
bridegroom, saying,_

The servant of God, _name_, is crowned for the handmaid of God, _name_,
in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

                _Then he crowneth also the bride, saying,_

The handmaid of God, _name_, is crowned for the servant of God, _name_,
in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

              _Then he blesseth them thrice, saying thrice,_

O Lord our God, crown them with glory and honour.

             _Then the prokimenon of the epistle, tone viii._

Thou hast set upon their heads crowns of precious stones; they asked life
of thee, and thou gavest it them.

_Verse._ For thou wilt give them a blessing to ages of ages, thou wilt
make them glad through joy with thy countenance.

               _The epistle to the Ephesians, section cci._

Brethren, give thanks.... _ending_, that she reverence her husband.[13]

                                                               _Alleluia._

_Verse._ Thou, O Lord, shalt keep us, and shalt protect us, from this
generation, and to ages.

_Deacon._ Wisdom, standing, let us hear....

                   _The gospel from John, section vi._

At that time there was a marriage.... _ending_, believed on him.[14]

_Deacon._ Let us all say with our whole soul, and with our whole mind let
us say.

O Lord Almighty, the God....

Have mercy upon us, O God....

Furthermore let us pray for mercy, life, peace, health, salvation, and
visitation for the servants of God, _names_, _and he commemorateth whom
he wisheth_.

_Exclamation._ For a merciful....

_Deacon._ Let us pray to the Lord.

_Choir._ Lord have mercy.

                          _Priest, this prayer._

O Lord our God, who, in thy saving providence, didst vouchsafe in Cana
of Galilee to declare marriage honourable by thy presence; do thou now
thyself preserve in peace and unanimity thy servants, _name_, and,
_name_, whom thou art well-pleased should be conjoined to one another:
declare their marriage honourable: preserve their bed undefiled: be
pleased that their mutual life may be unblamable, and count them worthy
to attain unto a ripe old age, keeping thy commandments in a pure heart.

For thou art our God, the God to have mercy and to save, and to thee we
ascribe glory, with thine unbeginning Father, and with thine all-holy,
and good, and life-creating Spirit, now and ever, and to ages of ages.

_Choir._ Amen.

_Deacon._ Help us, save us, have mercy on us, and keep us, O God, by thy
grace.

_Choir._ Lord, have mercy.

That the whole day may be perfect, holy....

_Choir._ Vouchsafe, O Lord.

An angel of peace....

Pardon and forgiveness of our sins....

What is good and profitable for our souls....

That the remaining time of our life....

A christian end of our life....

Having prayed for the unity of the faith, and the communion of the Holy
Ghost....

_Choir._ To thee, O Lord.

                         _The priest exclaimeth,_

And count us worthy, O Master, with boldness to dare without condemnation
to call upon thee, our heavenly Father God, and say,

_And the people_, Our Father.... _all to the end_.

_The priest exclaimeth_, For thine is the kingdom....

Peace to all.

Bow your heads to the Lord.

_Then the common cup is brought, and the priest blesseth it, and saith
this prayer._

                    _Deacon._ Let us pray to the Lord.

O God, who by thy might createst all things, and confirmest the universe,
and adornest the crown of all things created by thee; do thou, with thy
spiritual blessing, bless also this common cup given for the community of
marriage unto them that are conjoined.

_With a loud voice_, For blessed is thy name, and glorified thy
kingdom....

_Choir._ Amen.

_Then the priest, taking in his hand the common cup, giveth them to drink
thrice, first to the man, and then to the woman. And straightway the
priest taketh them, while the groomsman holdeth the crowns behind, and
leadeth them in the form of a circle. And the priest, or the people, sing
the present troparion in tone v,_

Rejoice, O Esaias, the virgin is with child, and bringeth forth a son,
Emmanuel, God and man: the orient is his name, whom magnifying, we call
the virgin blessed.

                           _Another, tone vii._

O holy martyrs, who valiantly contended, and are crowned; pray ye the
Lord for mercy on our souls.

Glory to thee, Christ God, apostles’ boast, and martyrs’ joy, whose
preaching was the consubstantial Trinity.

_Then, taking the crown from the bridegroom, he saith,_

Be thou magnified, O bridegroom, as Abraham, and blessed as Isaac, and
increased as Jacob, walking in peace, and performing in righteousness the
commandments of God.

_And when he taketh the crown from the bride, he saith,_

And thou, O bride, be thou magnified as Sara, and rejoiced as Rebecca,
and increased as Rachel, being glad in thy husband, and keeping the
paths of the law, for so God is well-pleased.

_Deacon._ Let us pray to the Lord.

_Choir._ Lord, have mercy.

                          _Priest, The prayer._

O God, our God, who wast present in Cana of Galilee, and didst bless
the marriage there; do thou bless also these thy servants, who, by thy
providence, are conjoined in the community of marriage. Bless their
incomings and outgoings, replenish their life with good things, accept
their crowns in thy kingdom unsullied and undefiled, and preserve them
without offence to ages of ages.

_Choir._ Amen.

_Priest._ Peace to all.

Bow your heads to the Lord.

                        _And the priest prayeth._

The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, the all-holy, and
consubstantial, and life-originating Trinity, one Godhead and
sovereignty, bless you, and vouchsafe unto you long life, well-favoured
children, progress in life and faith, and replenish you with all the
good things of earth, and count you worthy of the obtaining of promised
blessings, through the prayers of the holy God-bearing one, and of all
the Saints. Amen.

_Then they come and congratulate them, and they kiss one another, and
the full dismissal is made by the priest._

_Saith the deacon_, Wisdom.

_Choir._ The more honourable than the Cherubim....

                         _Priest, the dismissal._

He that by his presence in Cana of Galilee declared marriage to be
honourable, Christ our true God, through the prayers of his most pure
Mother; of the holy, glorious, and all-praised apostles; of the holy
god-crowned sovereigns and equals of the apostles, Constantine and Helen;
of the holy great martyr Procopius, and of all the Saints, have mercy
upon us and save us, as being good and the lover of mankind.




[Illustration]




_Chapter XI._

PRAYER AT THE TAKING OFF OF THE CROWNS ON THE EIGHTH DAY.


O Lord our God, who blessest the crown of the year, and permittest these
crowns to be put on them that are conjoined to one another by the law of
marriage, vouchsafing them to them as the reward of chastity; for they
are pure that are conjoined in the lawfully appointed marriage that
is from thee; do thou thyself also bless, in the taking off of these
crowns, them that have been conjoined together, and preserve their union
unbroken, that they may ever give thanks unto thine all-holy name, of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, now and ever, and to ages
of ages. Amen.

_Priest._ Peace to all.

O Lord, thy servants, having met in concord and accomplished the order
of marriage as at Cana of Galilee, and contracted the signs according
thereto, ascribe glory to thee, to the Father, and to the Son, and to the
Holy Ghost, now and ever, and to ages of ages. Amen.

                           _And the dismissal._




[Illustration]




_Chapter XII._

THE ORDER FOR A SECOND MARRIAGE.


_The priest beginneth_, Blessed be our God.... _Then_, Trisagion. _After_
Our Father.... _the troparion of the day_.

                             _Then, ectenia._

In peace let us pray to the Lord.

For the peace that is from above....

For the peace of the whole world....

For this holy temple....

For the servants of God, _name_, and, _name_, and for their protection by
God and mutual life, let us pray to the Lord.

That they may live together virtuously in unanimity, let us pray to the
Lord.

Help us, save us, have mercy....

Commemorating our most holy, most pure, most blessed....

For to thee is due....

_Then_, Let us pray to the Lord.

                          _Priest, the prayer._

O God eternal, who bringest things that are divided unto unity, and
imposest upon these two an indissoluble bond of love, who didst bless
Isaac and Rebecca, and declare them to be the inheritors of thy promise;
do thou thyself also bless these thy servants, _name_, and, _name_,
directing them in every good work.

For a merciful and man-loving God thou art, and to thee we ascribe glory,
to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, now and ever, and
to ages of ages. Amen.

_Priest._ Peace to all.

_Deacon._ Bow your heads to the Lord.

                          _Priest, the prayer._

O Lord our God, who hast espoused the church as a pure virgin from among
the gentiles; do thou bless these espousals, and unite and keep these
thy servants in peace and unanimity.

For to thee is due all glory, honour, and worship, to the Father, and to
the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, now and ever, and to ages of ages.

_Then the priest, taking the rings, giveth first the golden one to the
man, and the silver one to the woman, and saith to the man,_

The servant of God, _name_, is betrothed to the handmaid of God, _name_,
in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.

_And in like manner to the woman_, The handmaid of God, _name_, is
betrothed to the servant of God, _name_, in the name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.

_And he maketh a cross with the rings upon their heads, and placeth them
on the fingers of their right hands. Then the sponsor changeth the rings
of the bridal pair._

_After this, the deacon._ Let us pray to the Lord.

                          _Priest, the prayer._

Master, Lord our God, who sparest all, and providest for all, who knowest
the secrets of men, having knowledge of all things; do thou cleanse
our sins, and pardon the transgression of thy servants, calling them
to repentance: vouchsafe unto them remission of iniquities, cleansing
of sins, pardon of voluntary and involuntary transgressions, O thou
that knowest the weakness of human nature, thou Fashioner and Creator.
O thou who didst forgive Raab the harlot, and accept the repentance of
the publican, remember not our sins of ignorance from our youth up. For
if thou, O Lord, shouldest mark transgressions, who should stand before
thee, O Lord? or what flesh should be justified in thy sight? For thou
only art just, sinless, holy, of abundant mercy, plenteous beneficence,
and repentest thee concerning the evils of men. Do thou thyself, O
Master, who claimest thy servants, _name_, _name_, unite them to one
another in love; give unto them the conversion of the publican, the tears
of the harlot, and the confession of the thief, that, through repentance
from all their heart, performing thy commandments in unanimity and peace,
they may be counted worthy of thy heavenly kingdom.

For thou art the provider for all, and to thee we ascribe glory....

_Priest._ Peace to all.

_Deacon._ Bow your heads to the Lord.

                            _And this prayer._

O Lord Jesus Christ, Word of God, who wast lifted up upon the precious
and life-effecting cross, and didst tear up the handwriting that was
against us, and deliver us from the power of the devil; do thou cleanse
the transgressions of thy servants, for, unable to bear the burden and
the heat of the day, and the burning of the flesh, they are come to a
second community of marriage, in accordance with that which thou hast
lawfully appointed by thy chosen vessel, Paul, the apostle, saying,
because of our low estate, It is better to marry in the Lord than to
burn. Do thou thyself, as being good and man-loving, have mercy and
pardon, cleanse, remit, and forgive our debts; for thou art he that took
our weaknesses on thy shoulders: for there is none sinless, or without
defilement for even one day of his life: thou only art the one who didst
bear flesh sinlessly, and thou bestowest upon us eternal passionlessness.

For thou art God, the God of the penitent, and to thee we ascribe glory,
to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, now and ever, and
to ages of ages.

_People._ Amen.

                         Let us pray to the Lord.

                          _Priest, the prayer._

O holy God, who didst form man from the dust, and from his rib didst
fashion woman, and yoke her unto him a helpmeet for him, because so it
was seemly unto thy majesty for man not to be alone upon the earth;
do thou thyself, now, O Master, stretch forth thy hand from thy holy
dwelling-place, and conjoin this thy servant, _name_, and this thine
handmaid, _name_; for by thee a woman is conjoined to a husband. Yoke
them together in unanimity, crown them in one flesh, bestow on them fruit
of the womb, and the gain of well-favoured children.

For thine is the might, and thine is the kingdom, and the power....

_And, taking the crowns, he crowneth the bridegroom, saying,_

The servant of God, _name_, is crowned for the handmaid of God, _name_,
in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

_In like manner he crowneth also the bride, saying,_

The handmaid of God, _name_, is crowned for the servant of God, _name_,
in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

                 _Then he blesseth them, saying thrice,_

O Lord our God, crown them with glory and honour.

_Then he saith the epistle and gospel, as they are written in the first
coronation. Vide page 67._

                            _Then the deacon._

Let us all say with our whole soul....

O Lord Almighty, the God of our fathers....

Have mercy upon us, O God....

Furthermore let us pray for mercy, life, peace, health, salvation, and
visitation for the servants of God, _names_, _and he commemorateth whom
he wisheth_.

_Exclamation._ For a merciful....

_Deacon._ Let us pray to the Lord.

                          _Priest, this prayer._

O Lord our God, who, in thy saving providence, didst vouchsafe in Cana
of Galilee to declare marriage honourable by thy presence; do thou now
thyself preserve in peace and unanimity thy servants, _name_, and,
_name_, whom thou art well-pleased should be conjoined to one another:
declare their marriage honourable: preserve their bed undefiled: be
pleased that their mutual life may be unblamable, and count them worthy
to attain unto a ripe old age, keeping thy commandments in a pure heart.

For thou art our God, the God to have mercy and to save, and to thee we
ascribe glory, with thine unbeginning Father, and with thine all-holy,
and good, and life-creating Spirit, now and ever, and to ages of ages.
Amen.

                                _Deacon._

Help us, save us, have mercy....

That the whole day may be perfect, holy....

An angel of peace, a faithful....

Pardon and forgiveness of our sins....

What is good and profitable for our souls....

That the remaining time of our life....

A christian end of our life....

Having prayed for the unity of the faith, and the communion....

                         _The priest exclaimeth,_

And count us worthy, O Master....

_People._ Our Father....

_Priest_, For thine is the kingdom....

Amen.

_Priest._ Peace to all.

Bow your heads to the Lord.

_Then the common cup is brought, and the priest blesseth it, and saith
this prayer._

O God, who by thy might createst all things, and confirmest the universe,
and adornest the crown of all things created by thee; do thou, with thy
spiritual blessing, bless also this common cup given for the community of
marriage unto them that are conjoined.

                           _With a loud voice,_

For blessed is thy name, and glorified thy kingdom....

_Then the priest, taking in his hand the common cup, giveth them to drink
thrice, first to the man, and then to the woman. And straightway the
priest, taking them, leadeth them in the form of a circle, and singeth in
tone v,_

Rejoice, O Esaias, the virgin is with child, and bringeth forth a son,
Emmanuel, God and man: the orient is his name, whom magnifying, we call
the virgin blessed.

                           _Another, tone vii._

O holy martyrs, who valiantly contended and are crown’d; pray ye the Lord
for mercy on our souls.

Glory to thee, Christ God, apostles’ boast and martyrs’ joy, whose
preaching was the consubstantial Trinity.

          _And, taking the crown from the bridegroom, he saith,_

Be thou magnified, O bridegroom, as Abraham, and blessed as Isaac, and
increased as Jacob, walking in peace, and performing in righteousness the
commandments of God.

            _And, taking the crown from the bride, he saith,_

And thou, O bride, be thou magnified as Sara, and rejoiced as Rebecca,
and increased as Rachel, being glad in thy husband, and keeping the paths
of the law, for so God is well pleased.

                         Let us pray to the Lord.

                            _Then the prayer._

O God, our God, who wast present in Cana of Galilee, and didst bless
the marriage there; do thou bless also these thy servants, who, by thy
providence, are conjoined in the community of marriage. Bless their
incomings and outgoings, replenish their life with good things, accept
their crowns in thy kingdom unsullied and undefiled, and preserve them
without offence to ages of ages.

_Choir._ Amen.

_Priest._ Peace to all.

Bow your heads to the Lord.

                            _And he prayeth._

The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, the all-holy, and
consubstantial, and life-originating Trinity, one Godhead and
sovereignty, bless you, and vouchsafe unto you long life, well-favoured
children, progress in life and faith, and replenish you with all the good
things of the earth, and count you worthy of the obtaining of promised
blessings, through the prayers of the holy God-bearing one, and of all
the Saints. Amen.

_Then they come and congratulate them, and they kiss one another. And the
dismissal is made._

He that by his presence in Cana of Galilee declared marriage to be
honourable, Christ our true God, through the prayers of his most pure
Mother; of the holy, glorious, and all-praised apostles; of the holy
god-crowned sovereigns and equals of the apostles, Constantine and Helen;
of the holy great-martyr Procopius, and of all the Saints, have mercy
upon us and save us, as being good and the lover of mankind.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




_Chapter XIII._

THE ORDER OF HOLY UNCTION SUNG BY SEVEN PRIESTS ASSEMBLED IN A CHURCH OR
IN A HOUSE.


_A table is prepared, and on this they place the holy gospel and a dish
of wheat, and on the wheat an empty oil cruet, and round it in the wheat
seven twigs wrapped with cotton wool for the anointing; and they give
tapers to all the priests. And, all standing round the table vested in
phelonia, the first of the priests taketh the censer with incense, and
censeth the table upon which the oil is round about, and all the church,
or the house, and the people; and, standing before the table, looking
towards the east, he beginneth,_

Blessed be our God.... _And_ Trisagion. O most holy Trinity.... Our
Father.... For thine is the kingdom.... Lord, have mercy, _xii_. O come,
let us worship.... _thrice_.

_And psalm cxlii._ O Lord hear my prayer....

                   Glory. Both now. Alleluia, _thrice_.

                      _And the deacon, the ectenia._

Again and again in peace let us pray to the Lord.

Help us, save us, have mercy....

Commemorating our most holy, most pure, most blessed....

_Priest._ For to thee is due....

_Choir._ Amen.

             _And straightway they sing Alleluia in tone vi._

_Verse i._ O Lord, rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chasten me in
thy fury.

_Verse ii._ Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am weak.

                             _Then troparia._

Have mercy upon us, O Lord, have mercy upon us; for, destitute of all
defence, we sinners offer unto thee, as Master, this prayer, Have mercy
upon us.

                                 _Glory._

O Lord, have mercy upon us; for we have put our trust in thee. Be not
exceedingly wroth against us, neither remember our transgressions; but,
as being loving-kind, look now upon us, and deliver us from our enemies:
for thou art our God, and we are thy people, we are all the work of thy
hand, and we call upon thy name.

                               _Both now._

Open unto us the gates of loving-kindness, O blessed God-bearing one,
that we perish not who put our trust in thee, but through thee may we be
delivered from calamities; for thou art the salvation of the christian
race.

_After this_, Have mercy upon me, O God....

                _And the canon, whereof the acrostic is,_

                    A song of prayer oil by Arsenius.

                         _Ode i. Irmos. Tone iv._

Through the red sea’s depth....

O Master, who with oil of loving-kindness dost mortals’ souls and bodies
alway tranquilize, and them that faithful be preserv’st with oil; do thou
thyself now have compassion upon those approaching thee by means of oil.

The earth, O Master, is of thy mercy full. Therefore to-day anointed with
thy sacred precious oil, in faith we pray thee to bestow thy mercy that
surpasseth thought on us.

                                 _Glory._

O lover of mankind, who mercifully thine apostles didst command to
minister thy priestly unction on thine ailing servants; do thou, at their
entreaties, through thy seal, have mercy upon all.

                               _Both now._

O only pure one, who didst bear the boundless sea of peace, by thine
entreaties alway unto God, thy servant free from ailings and from griefs,
that he may magnify thee ceaselessly.

                            _Ode iii. Irmos._

In thee thy church is glad....

Thou that alone art wonderful to faithful men, merciful Christ, grant
from on high thy grace to him that suffereth grievously.

O Lord, who once, for thy divine token that the flood had ceas’d, didst
shew an olive branch, in mercy save the afflicted one.

                                 _Glory._

With a lamp of light divine, in mercy lighten him, O Christ, who now, in
faith through the anointing, to thy mercy maketh speed.

                               _Both now._

O Mother of the Maker of all things, look from on high with favour, and
release, by thine entreaties, the sufferer from his bitter pain.

                          _Kathisma, tone viii._

_Like_, The pastoral reed....

Thou that art a divine river of mercy, a depth of abundant sympathy, O
compassionate one; manifest the divine streams of thy mercy, and heal
all: let the springs of wonders flow plenteously, and wash all; for, ever
betaking ourselves to thee, we fervently entreat thy grace.

                           _Another, tone iv._

_Like_, Thou that wast lifted up....

Physician and helper of them that are in sufferings, redeemer and Saviour
of them that are in sicknesses; do thou thyself, O Master and Lord of
all, grant healing unto thine afflicted servant: have compassion and
mercy upon him who hath greatly offended, and deliver him, O Christ, from
iniquities, that he may glorify thy divine power.

                             _Ode iv. Irmos._

Seeing thee lifted up....

Thou, Saviour, that, as myrrh corruptless, dost, through thy grace,
thyself outpour and cleanse the world; compassionate be, yea, merciful to
him, who doth, in faith divine, the body’s sores anoint.

With the tranquility of thy mercy’s seal, O Master, sign now the senses
of thy servants, and make the way thereto accessless and approachless to
all opposing powers.

                                 _Glory._

Thou who dost bid that thy divine hierurgists be call’d to them whose
strength hath fail’d, and these by prayer and unction with thine oil to
save; do thou, O lover of mankind, save, by thy mercy, the afflicted one.

                               _Both now._

Most holy and God-bearing ever-virgin, strong shelter and defence, thou
ladder and thou wall, have mercy and compassion on the sufferer; for he
hath fled to thee, and thee alone.

                             _Ode v. Irmos._

Thou, Lord, my light....

Thou, good one, that art mercy’s depth, do thou, O merciful, have
mercy, in thy mercifulness divine, on him that suffereth; for thou art
loving-kind.

Sanctifying unspeakably from on high, O Christ, our souls and bodies with
the divine impression of thy seal, with thine own hand heal all.

                                 _Glory._

O most good Lord, who, through thine untold love, acceptedst
myrrh-anointing from the sinful woman; compassionate thy servant.

                               _Both now._

All-praised, pure, and most good Queen, have mercy upon them that are
anointed with the oil divine, and save thy servant.

                             _Ode vi. Irmos._

I will sacrifice unto thee with the voice....

O lover of mankind, who shewest by thy words anointing is for kings, and
this performest by highpriests; save thou the sufferer by thy seal, for
thou art loving-kind.

Let no communicating act of bitter demons touch his senses who is sign’d
with the divine anointing, Saviour; but with the safeguard of thy glory
him surround.

                                 _Glory._

Stretch from on high thy hand, O lover of mankind, and sanctify thine
oil, and grant this to thy servant, Saviour, for healing and deliverance
from all sicknesses.

                               _Both now._

Mother of the Creator, thou, in thy sacred temple, hast appear’d a
fruitful olive tree, whereby the world appeareth fill’d with mercy.
Therefore save the sufferer by the touching of thy prayers.

                          _Condakion, tone ii._

_Like_, Seeking the things above....

Thou that art the fountain of mercy, O thou that art most good, do thou
deliver from every calamity them that with fervent faith fall down before
thine unspeakable mercy; and, O thou that art loving-kind, taking away
their ailings, do thou grant unto them thy divine grace from on high.

                            _Ode vii. Irmos._

The abrahamic children in the furnace....

Thou, Saviour, that alone art God, who in thy mercy and compassions,
healest the spiritual passions and bodily wounds of all; physician be
thou for this sufferer with disease, and make him whole thyself.

Since with anointing oil the heads of all anointed are, so give to this
one joy of gladness, Christ, granting the mercy of thy redemption unto
him that seeketh this, for thy rich mercy’s sake, O Lord.

                                 _Glory._

Thy seal, O Saviour, against demons is a sword, and prayers of priests
a fire that burneth passions of the soul. Therefore in faith we praise
thee, we, who have healing gain’d.

                               _Both now._

O thou, the Mother of God, who didst conceive within thy womb, in wise
befitting God, him that doth all things hold within his hand, and flesh
didst give to him unspeakably; we pray thee, Be thou gracious to this
suffering one.

                            _Ode viii. Irmos._

With hands extended, Daniel....

O Saviour, have mercy upon all, according to thy mercy mighty and divine;
for, for this cause, we all are gather’d here to image forth in mystic
wise the condescension of thy mercies, and to bring the unction with the
oil in faith unto thy servant, whom visit thou likewise.

With thy mercy’s streams, O Christ, and by thy priests’ anointing wash
away, as Lord the loving-kind, the pains and wounds, and overwhelmings of
affliction of him tormented with the stress of sufferings, that he, being
sav’d, may praise thee with thanksgiving.

                                 _Glory._

The sign of condescension from on high and of tranquility being drawn on
us, O Master, through thy godlike mercy; do thou thy mercy not withdraw,
nor him reject who ever crieth faithfully, O bless the Lord, all ye his
works.

                               _Both now._

Glorious as a crown, O pure one, nature hath gain’d thy sacred
giving-birth, which crusheth hosts of foes, and mightily doth vanquish
them. Therefore, with festal brightness crowned through thy grace, we
thee extol, O most extolled Queen.

                             _Ode ix. Irmos._

Unquarried rock....

Look down from heaven, O compassionate one, and shew thy mercy unto all;
and thine assistance and thy strength bestow on him who now approacheth
thee through the divine anointing by thy priests, O lover of mankind.

O Saviour, thou most good, we have, rejoicing, seen the oil divine,
which, through thy godlike condescension for them that are recipients,
thou thyself accepted hast, and typically hast given to them that have
participated in the font divine.

                                 _Glory._

O Saviour, be compassionate and have mercy: deliver out of dangers and
afflictions—deliver from the arrows of the evil one the souls and bodies
of thy servants, and heal them, as the Lord, the merciful, by thy divine
anointing.

                               _Both now._

Accept thy servants’ songs and prayers, O Virgin, and, by thy
supplications, from sufferings and from ills deliver us, even us who to
thy sacred shelter us betake, O thou most pure.

It is very meet....

                            _Exapostilarion._

_Like_, He hath visited us....

In mercy, O thou good one, with thine eyes regard our prayer, ours, who
to-day are gather’d in thy holy temple to anoint with oil divine thy
suffering servant.

                        _Then stichera, tone iv._

_Like_, Thou hast given a sign....

Thou hast given thy grace through thine apostles, O good physician, lover
of mankind, to heal the wounds and sicknesses of all men through thy
holy oil. Therefore, as being loving-kind, him that now faithfully to
thy mercy hieth sanctify, have mercy upon him, and cleanse him from all
sickness, and count him worthy of thy corruptless sweetness, Lord.

O lover of mankind incomprehensible, who, with thine unseen hand, as
being loving-kind, sealest our senses with thine oil divine; look down
from heaven, and give to him that faithfully betaketh him to thee, and
asketh pardon of iniquities, healing of soul and body, that he may
glorify thee lovingly, and magnify thy might.

Through the anointing with thine oil, and through the touching of thy
priests, O lover of mankind, hallow thy servant from on high, free him
from sicknesses, cleanse him from soul’s defilement, wash him, O Saviour,
and deliver him from scandals manifold; tranquilize his grief, remove his
hindrances, and banish his afflictions, as being merciful and loving-kind.

                      _Glory. Both now. Theotokion._

O most pure royal palace much extoll’d, I pray thee, cleanse my mind
defil’d by every kind of sin; and make it a meet dwelling-place for the
most holy Trinity, that I thy worthless servant, being sav’d, may magnify
thy might and mercy measureless.

_Then_, Trisagion. O most holy Trinity.... _After_ Our Father.... For
thine is the kingdom....

                        _Then troparion, tone iv._

Thou that alone art quick to help, O Christ, make manifest from on high
a speedy visitation to thine ailing servant: deliver him from sicknesses
and bitter pains, and raise him up, that, without ceasing, he may praise
and glorify thee, through the God-bearing one’s entreaties, O thou sole
lover of mankind.

             _And after these the deacon, or the first of the
                      priests, saith this ectenia._

In peace let us pray to the Lord.

For the peace that is from above....

For the peace of the whole world....

For this holy temple, and for them that with faith....

That this oil may be blessed by the might, and operation, and descent of
the Holy Ghost, let us pray to the Lord.

For the servant of God, _name_, and for his visitation by God, and for
the coming upon him of the grace of the Holy Ghost, let us pray to the
Lord.

For his deliverance and ours from every affliction, passion, and want.

Help us, save us, have mercy on us, and keep us, O God....

Commemorating our most holy, most pure....

_Then the first of the priests saith the prayer of oil over the cruet._

_Note. Be it known that in the great church they pour wine instead of
water into the cruet of prayer-unction._

                         Let us pray to the Lord.

                            Lord, have mercy.

O Lord, who, through thy mercy and compassions, healest the infirmities
of our souls and bodies; do thou thyself, O Master, sanctify this oil,
that it may be to them that are anointed therewith for healing, and for
the removal of every passion, of defilement of flesh and spirit, and
of every ill, and that thereby may be glorified thy holy name, of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, now and ever, and to ages
of ages. Amen.

_And the other priests likewise read this prayer, but quietly to
themselves._

_And while the prayer is being said by the priests, they sing these
troparia._

                                _Tone iv._

Thou that alone art quick to help, O Christ, make manifest from on high
a speedy visitation to thine ailing servant: deliver him from sicknesses
and bitter pains, and raise him up, that, without ceasing, he may praise
and glorify thee, through the God-bearing one’s entreaties, O thou sole
lover of mankind.

With blinded spiritual eyes to thee, O Christ, I come, as he that from
his birth was blind; and penitentially to thee I cry, Be merciful to us,
thou that alone the good physician art.

                               _Tone iii._

My soul, that, Lord, by every kind of sin and unbecoming deeds is
paralys’d, O by thy godlike intervention do thou raise, as thou of old
a paralytic didst upraise, that I, being sav’d, may cry to thee, Give
healing unto me, O Christ compassionate.

                                _Tone ii._

O just one, as the Lord’s disciple, thou the gospel didst receive; as
martyr, dost possess that which unwritten is; a daring, as God’s brother,
hast; as hierarch, hast to pray: do thou beseech Christ God to save our
souls.

                                _Tone iv._

The Father’s sole-begotten, who is God the Word, in latter days hath come
to us, O James divine, declaring thee first pastor and instructor of them
that of Jerusalem were; a faithful steward too of ghostly mysteries.
Therefore, apostle, we all reverence thee.

                               _Tone iii._

To them of Myra, saint, thou didst appear a hierurgist; for Christ’s
evangel, thou, O venerated one, fulfilling, didst for thy people yield
thy soul, and save the innocent from death. For this cause art thou
sanctified as a great mystic of the grace of God.

                             _The same tone._

O pain-enduring one, that overcame the heathen, in dangers hath the world
thee found a champion great. Therefore, as thou didst humble Lyev’s
pride, and in the strife make Nestor brave, so, saint Demetrius, pray
Christ God to give great mercy unto us.

                             _The same tone._

Thou holy pain-enduring one, physician too, O Pantelimon, mediate with
God the merciful, that he may grant our souls remission of iniquities.

                               _Tone viii._

Ye saints that were unmercenary and wonders wrought, make visitation in
our weaknesses. Freely ye have receiv’d: O freely give to us.

                                _Tone ii._

Who can narrate thy mightiness, O virgin one? for thou dost wonders gush,
and pourest cures, and prayest for our souls, O thou divine and friend of
Christ.

Warm advocate and assailless wall, the spring of mercy and the world’s
defence, to thee unceasingly we cry, God-bearing Queen, prevent thou us,
and us from dangers free, thou that alone art quick to intercede.

_Deacon._ Let us attend.

_The first priest._ Peace to all.

_Choir._ And to thy spirit.

_Deacon._ Wisdom, let us attend.

                    _Reader, the prokimenon, tone i._

Let thy mercy, O Lord, come upon us like as we have put our trust in thee.

                                 _Verse._

Rejoice, O ye righteous, in the Lord, for praise becometh the upright.

                              _The epistle._

The lection of the catholic message of James.

_And be it known that the epistle is read by the deacon, section lvii,_

Brethren, take for an example.... _ending_, availeth much.[15]

_The first priest._ Peace to thee. Alleluia.

_Tone viii. Verse._ I will sing unto thee of mercy and judgment, O Lord.

                  _The gospel from Luke, section liii._

At that time, a certain lawyer.... _ending_, do thou likewise.[16]

_Then_, Have mercy upon us, O God, according to thy great mercy, we pray
thee, hear and have mercy.

Lord, have mercy, _thrice_.

Furthermore let us pray for mercy, life, peace, health, salvation,
visitation, and forgiveness of sins for the servant of God, _name_.

Lord, have mercy, _thrice_.

That to him may be remitted every iniquity, voluntary and involuntary,
let us pray to the Lord.

Lord, have mercy, _thrice_.

                          _And the exclamation._

For a merciful and man-loving God thou art, and to thee we ascribe glory,
to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, now and ever, and
to ages of ages. Amen.

_Deacon._ Let us pray to the Lord.

Lord have mercy.

                          _Priest, the prayer._

O thou that art unbeginning, eternal, and in the holy of holies, who
didst send down thine only-begotten Son, who healeth every infirmity and
every wound of our souls and bodies; do thou send down thy Holy Ghost,
and sanctify this oil, and let it be unto thine anointed servant, _name_,
for a perfect deliverance from his sins, and for the inheritance of the
kingdom of heaven.

_Be it known that some say this prayer only thus far, with the
exclamation,_

For it is thine to have mercy.....

                   _But others say even unto the end,_

For thou art God great and wonderful, who keepest thy testament and thy
mercy unto them that love thee, granting deliverance from sins through
thy holy child, Jesus Christ, who regenerateth us from sin, enlighteneth
the blind, setteth up them that are cast down, loveth the righteous,
and is merciful to sinners, who hath called us out of darkness and the
shadow of death, saying unto them that are in bonds, Come forth, and to
them that are in darkness, Be ye unveiled. For he hath shined in our
hearts the light of the knowledge of his countenance, in that for our
sake he was made manifest upon earth, and dwelt among men; and to them
that accepted thee gave he power to become the children of God; and hath
bestowed upon us a sonship through the laver of regeneration, and made
us to have no participation in the domination of the devil. For thou
wast not pleased that we should be cleansed through blood, but hast
given, through holy oil, an image of his cross, that we may be a flock
of Christ, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, cleansing us by water,
and sanctifying us by thy holy spirit. Do thou thyself, O Master Lord,
give grace unto us in this thy service, as thou didst give unto Moses,
thine accepted, and unto Samuel, thy beloved, and unto John, thine
elect, and unto all who in every generation have been acceptable unto
thee. And so make us to be ministers of thy new testament upon this oil,
which thou hast made thine own through the precious blood of thy Christ,
that, putting away worldly lusts, we may die unto sin and live unto
righteousness, so that we may be led of the proposed oil to be invested
in him with the anointing of sanctification. May this oil, O Lord, be an
oil of gladness, an oil of sanctification, a royal investiture, a cuirass
of power, an averting of every diabolical operation, an inviolable seal,
a rejoicing of the heart, an eternal joy, that they that are anointed
with this oil of regeneration may be terrible to adversaries, and may
shine in the brightness of thy saints, having no spot or wrinkle; and
may they attain unto thine eternal rest, and gain the prize of the
calling from on high.

For it is thine to have mercy, and to save us, O our God, and to thee we
ascribe glory, with thine only-begotten Son, and with thy most holy, and
good, and life-creating Spirit, now and ever, and to ages of ages, Amen.

_And after the prayer; the priest taketh a twig, and, dipping it in
the holy oil, anointeth the sick person in the form of a cross, on the
forehead, on the nostrils, on the cheeks, on the lips, on the breast, on
the hands on both sides, saying this prayer._

Holy Father, physician of souls and bodies, who didst send thine
only-begotten Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, who healeth every infirmity,
and delivereth from death; do thou heal thy servant, _name_, from the
bodily and spiritual weakness that presseth upon him, and quicken him
by the grace of thy Christ; through the prayers of our most holy Lady,
the God-bearing and ever-virgin Mary; through the intercession of the
honourable, heavenly bodiless powers; through the power of the precious
and life-effecting cross; of the honourable glorious prophet, Forerunner,
and Baptist John; of the holy, glorious, and all-praised apostles; of the
holy glorious, and excellently victorious martyrs; of our venerable and
god-bearing fathers; of the holy and unmercenary physicians, Cosmas and
Damian, Cyrus and John, Pantelimon and Hermolaus, Sampson and Diomed,
Photius and Anicetas; of the holy and righteous god-progenitors, Joakim
and Anna, and of all the Saints.

For thou art the fount of healing, O our God, and to thee we ascribe
glory, with thine only-begotten Son, and with thy consubstantial Spirit,
now and ever, and to ages of ages. Amen.

_This prayer is said by each priest after he hath said his gospel and
prayer, while he anointeth the sick person with oil._

_Deacon._ Let us attend.

_The second priest._ Peace to all.

                          _Prokimenon, tone ii._

The Lord is my strength and song, and is become for salvation unto me.

_Verse._ When thou chastenest, thou hast chastened me, O Lord; but thou
hast not given me up unto death.

                _The epistle to the Romans, section cxvi._

Brethren, we that are strong ought.... _ending_, received us to the glory
of God.[17]

_The second priest._ Peace to thee.

                           _Alleluia, tone v._

_Verse._ I will sing of thy mercy, O Lord, for ever.

                           _The second priest._

                  _The gospel from Luke, section xciv._

At that time, Jesus passed through.... _ending_, to save that which was
lost.[18]

                            _And the deacon._

Have mercy upon us, O God.... _Page 98._

Furthermore let us pray for mercy, life....

That to him may be remitted....

For a merciful and man-loving God....

                          _Priest, the prayer._

O God, great and most high, who art worshipped by all creation, thou
true fountain of wisdom, and impenetrable depth of goodness, and
boundless ocean of benignity; do thou thyself, O man-loving Master, O
God of things eternal and wonderful, whom none among men by thinking can
comprehend, look upon us, and hearken unto us, thine unworthy servants,
and wheresoever in thy great name we bring this oil, do thou send down
thy gift of healing, and the remission of sins, and heal him in the
plentitude of thy mercy. Yea, O Lord, thou good physician, thou sole
merciful one and lover of mankind, who repentest thee concerning our
ills, who knowest that the intention of man inclineth unto evil from his
youth up, who desirest not the death of a sinner, but that he should
return and live, who for the salvation of sinners, being God, becamest
man, and for thy creature wast thyself created: thou art he that hath
said, I came not to call the righteous but sinners to repentance: thou
art he that hath sought the lost sheep: thou art he that hath diligently
sought the lost drachma, and found it: thou art he that hath said, He
that cometh unto me I will in no wise cast out: thou art he that did not
loathe the sinful woman, who watered thy revered feet with tears: thou
art he that hath said, As often as thou fallest, arise, and be saved:
thou art he that hath said, There is joy in heaven over, one sinner that
repenteth: do thou thyself, O benign Master, look down from the height
of thy sanctuary, visiting us, thy sinful and unworthy servants, at this
hour, with the grace of thy Holy Ghost, and be present with thy servant,
_name_, who acknowledgeth his iniquities, and in faith draweth nigh unto
thee; and, accepting him in thine own love to man, in whatsoever he hath
offended, by word, or deed, or intention, making remission, do thou
cleanse him, and make him pure from every sin, and, being ever present
with him, keep the remaining time of his life, that walking in thy
statutes, he may never become a derision to the devil, so that in him may
be glorified thy most holy name.

                              _Exclamation._

For it is thine to have mercy, and to save us, O Christ God, and to thee
we ascribe glory, with thine unbeginning Father, and with thy most holy,
and good, and life-creating Spirit, now and ever, and to ages of ages.
Amen.

_And after the prayer the second priest straightway taketh a second twig,
and, dipping it in the holy oil, anointeth the sick person, saying the
prayer,_

Holy Father, physician of souls and bodies....

                             _Vide page 101._

_And the deacon._ Let us attend.

_The third priest._ Peace to all.

                         _Prokimenon, tone iii._

The Lord is my light, and my Saviour, whom shall I fear?

_Verse._ The Lord is the defence of my life, of whom shall I be afraid.

             _The epistle to the Corinthians, section cliii._

Brethren, ye are the body of Christ.... _ending_, Charity never
faileth.[19]

_The third priest._ Peace to thee.

_Deacon._ Wisdom. _Alleluia, tone ii._

_Verse._ In thee, O Lord, have I trusted, let me never be confounded.

                       _The third priest readeth._

_The gospel from Matthew, section xxxiv. from the paragraph,_

At that time, Jesus called.... _ending_, freely give.[20]

             _And the deacon straightway saith this ectenia._

Have mercy upon us, O God....

Furthermore let us pray for mercy, life....

That to him may be remitted....

_And, with a loud voice_, For a merciful....

_Deacon._ Let us pray to the Lord.

                      _The priest saith the prayer._

Master Almighty, holy King, who chastenest, and killest not, who
supportest them that are falling, and settest up them that are cast
down, who restorest the bodily afflictions of men; we entreat thee, O
our God, that thou wouldest send down thy mercy upon this oil, and upon
them that are anointed therewith in thy name, that it may be to them for
the healing of soul and body, and for the cleansing and removal of every
passion, and of every sickness and wound, and of every defilement of
flesh and spirit. Yea, O Lord, send down from heaven thy healing power;
touch the body; allay the fever; soothe the suffering; and banish every
lurking weakness. Be the physician of thy servant, _name_, raise him
from a bed of suffering, and from a couch of ailment whole and perfectly
restored, granting him in thy church to be acceptable, and one that doeth
thy will.

                              _Exclamation._

For it is thine to have mercy and to save us, O our God, and to thee we
ascribe glory, to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, now
and ever, and to ages of ages. Amen.

_And after the prayer the third priest taketh a third twig, and, dipping
it in the holy oil, anointeth the sick person, saying the prayer,_

Holy Father, physician of souls and bodies....

                             _Vide page 101._

_Deacon._ Let us attend.

                           _The fourth priest._

Peace to all.

                          _Prokimenon, tone iv._

In whatsover day that I call upon thee, O hearken unto me speedily.

_Verse._ O Lord, hearken unto my prayer, and unto my crying.

            _The epistle to the Corinthians, section clxxxii._

Brethren, ye are the temple.... _ending_, holiness in the fear of God.[21]

_Priest._ Peace to thee.

                           _Alleluia, tone ii._

_Verse._ I waited patiently for the Lord, and he inclined unto me.

                           _The fourth priest._

_The gospel from Matthew, section xxvi._

At that time, Jesus came into Peter’s house.... _ending_, his disciples
followed him.[22]

_And the deacon._ Have mercy upon us, O God....

                                                                _Page 98._

Furthermore let us pray for mercy, life....

That to him may be remitted....

_And the exclamation_, For a merciful....

_Deacon._ Let us pray to the Lord.

                          _Priest, the prayer._

O good and man-loving, benign and most merciful Lord, great in mercy
and plenteous in goodness, O Father of compassions and God of every
consolation, who hast empowered us, through thy holy apostles, to heal
the weaknesses of the people by prayer with oil; do thou thyself appoint
this oil for the healing of them that are anointed therewith, for the
alleviation of every sickness and every wound, for deliverance from evils
of them that expect salvation that is from thee. Yea, O Master, Lord our
God, we beseech thee, thou almighty one, to save us all, and, thou that
alone art the physician of souls and bodies, to sanctify us all; thou
that healest every sickness, do thou heal thy servant, _name_; raise
him from the bed of suffering through the mercy of thy grace; visit him
through thy mercy and compassions; remove from him every ailment and
weakness, that, being raised by thy mighty hand, he may serve thee with
all thanksgiving, as also that we, now participating in thine unspeakable
love to man, may sing and glorify thee, who doest great and wonderful,
glorious and transcendent things.

For it is thine to have mercy, and to save us, O our God....

_And after the prayer the fourth priest straightway taketh a fourth twig,
and, dipping it in the holy oil, anointeth the sick person, saying the
prayer,_

Holy Father, physician of souls.... _Vide page 101._

_Deacon._ Let us attend.

_The fifth priest._ Peace to all.

                          _Prokimenon, tone v._

Thou, O Lord, shalt keep us and shalt protect us, from this generation,
and for ever.

_Verse._ Save me, O Lord, for the righteous are become few.

_Deacon._ Wisdom.

            _The epistle to the Corinthians, section clxviii._

Brethren, we would not have you ignorant.... _ending_, by many on our
behalf.[23]

_Priest._ Peace to thee.

                           _Alleluia, tone v._

_Verse._ I will sing of thy mercy, O Lord, for ever.

                 _The gospel from Matthew, section cvi._

The Lord spake this parable, Then shall the kingdom.... _ending_, wherein
the Son of man cometh.[24]

                            _And the deacon._

Have mercy upon us, O God.... _Page 98._

Furthermore let us pray for mercy, life....

That to him may be remitted....

                          _And the exclamation._

For a merciful....

_Deacon._ Let us pray to the Lord.

                          _Priest, this prayer._

O Lord our God, who chastenest and again healest, who raisest the
poor from the earth, and liftest up the beggar from the dunghill, O
Father of the orphans, and haven of the tempest-tost, and physician of
them that are sick; who painlessly bearest our weaknesses, and takest
away our sicknesses; who shewest mercy with gentleness, overlookest
transgressions, and takest away unrighteousness; who art quick to help
and slow to anger; who didst breathe upon thy disciples, and say, Receive
ye the Holy Ghost, whosoever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto
them; who acceptest the repentance of sinners, and hast power to forgive
many and grievous sins, and vouchsafest healing unto all that continue
in weakness and protracted sickness; who me also, thine humble, sinful,
and unworthy servant, involved in many sins, and overwhelmed with lusts
of pleasures, hast called to the holy and exceeding great degree of the
priesthood, and to enter in within the veil into the holy of holies,
where the holy Angels desire to stoop to look, and hear the evangelical
voice of the Lord God, and behold as eye-witnesses the presence of the
holy oblation, and be enraptured with the divine and sacred liturgy; who
hast counted me worthy to minister the sacred rite of thy most heavenly
mystery, and to offer unto thee gifts and sacrifices for our sins,
and for the ignorances of the people, and to mediate for thy rational
flock, that, through thy great and unspeakable love to man, thou mayest
cleanse their iniquities; do thou thyself, O most good King, attend
unto my prayer at this hour, and on this holy day, and in every time
and place, and accept the voice of my prayer, and grant healing unto
thy servant, _name_, who is in weakness of soul and body, vouchsafing
unto him remission of sins and forgiveness of voluntary and involuntary
iniquities: heal his incurable wounds, and every sickness and every
sore, bestowing upon him spiritual healing. It was thou who didst touch
the mother-in-law of Peter, and the fever left her, and she arose and
ministered unto thee: do thou thyself, O Master, bestow a remedy upon thy
servant, _name_, and an alleviation of every mortal pain, and remember
thine abundant compassions, and thy mercy. Remember that the intention
of man inclineth constantly toward evil from his youth up, and that none
is to be found sinless upon earth; for thou alone art without sin, who
didst come and save the race of men, and deliver us from the servitude of
the enemy. For if thou shouldest enter into judgment with thy servants,
there is none that would be found pure from defilement, but every mouth
would be shut, not having wherewith to answer; for all our righteousness
is as filthy rags before thee. For this cause remember not, Lord, the
sins of our youth; for thou art the hope of the hopeless, and the rest of
them that are weary and heavy-laden with transgressions, and to thee we
ascribe glory, with thine unbeginning Father, and with thy most holy, and
good, and life-creating Spirit, now and ever, and to ages of ages. Amen.

_And after the prayer the fifth priest straightway taketh a fifth twig,
and, dipping it in the holy oil, anointeth the sick person, saying the
prayer,_

Holy Father, physician of souls and bodies....

                             _Vide page 101._

_Deacon._ Let us attend.

_And the sixth priest._ Peace to all.

                          _Prokimenon, tone vi._

Have mercy upon me, O God, according to great mercy.

_Verse._ Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit
within me.

             _The epistle to the Galatians, section ccxiii._

Brethren, the fruit of the spirit.... _ending_, so fulfil the law of
Christ.[25]

_The sixth priest._ Peace to thee.

_Deacon._ Wisdom, let us attend.

                           _Alleluia, tone vi._

_Verse._ Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord, in his commandments he
rejoiceth exceedingly.

_Deacon._ Wisdom, standing, let us hear the holy gospel.

                 _The gospel from Matthew, section lxii._

At that time, Jesus went.... _ending_, from that very hour.[26]

                            _And the deacon._

Have mercy upon us, O God....

Furthermore let us pray for mercy, life....

That to him may be remitted....

_Exclamation._ For a merciful...

_Deacon._ Let us pray to the Lord.

                        _The priest, this prayer._

We give thanks unto thee, O Lord our God, thou good lover of mankind, and
physician of our souls and bodies, who painlessly bearest our sicknesses,
and by whose stripes we have all been healed; thou good shepherd, who
camest to seek the wandering sheep; who givest consolation unto the
faint-hearted, and life unto them that are broken down; who didst heal
the source of the issue of blood that had lasted twelve years; who didst
deliver the daughter of the Chananitish woman from the ruthless demon;
who didst forgive the debt unto the two debtors, and give remission
unto the sinful woman; who didst bestow healing upon the paralytic,
with the remission of his sins; who didst justify the publican by a
word, and didst accept the thief in his last confession; who takest away
the sins of the world, and wast nailed on the cross; to thee we pray,
and thee we beseech, Do thou thyself, O God, in thy goodness, loosen,
forgive, and pardon the transgressions and sins of thy servant, _name_,
and his voluntary and involuntary iniquities, those in knowledge and
in ignorance, those by trespass and disobedience, those by night and
by day; or if he be under the curse of a priest, or of a father or a
mother; or if by the glance of the eye, or a movement of the eyelid; or
by the contact of adultery, or the tasting of prodigality, or in any
excitement of flesh and spirit he have estranged himself from thy will,
and from thy holiness. And if he have sinned, and in like manner we also,
as the good God that rememberest not evil and the lover of mankind,
do thou pardon, not leaving him and us to fall into a dissolute life,
neither to walk in ways of destruction. Yea, O Master Lord, hear me, a
sinner, at this hour on behalf of thy servant, _name_, and overlook,
as the God that rememberest not evil, all his iniquities; deliver him
from eternal torment; fill his mouth with thy praise; open his lips to
the glorification of thy name; extend his hands to the doing of thy
commandments; direct his feet in the path of thy gospel, confirming all
his members and his intention by thy grace. For thou art our God, who, by
thy holy apostles, hast commanded us, saying, Whatsoever ye shall bind on
earth, shall be bound in the heavens, and whatsoever ye shall loose on
earth shall be loosed in the heavens; and again, Unto whomsoever ye remit
sins, they are remitted unto them, and, If ye bind them, they are bound.
And, as thou didst hearken unto Ezekias in the affliction of his soul
in the hour of his death, and didst not despise his prayer, so hearken
unto me, thine humble, and sinful, and unworthy servant at this hour. For
thou, O Lord Jesus Christ, art he that, in thy goodness and love to man,
biddeth to forgive until seventy times seven them that fall into sins;
and thou repentest thee concerning our evils, and rejoicest over the
return of the wanderer. For, as is thy greatness, so also is thy mercy,
and to thee we ascribe glory, with thine unbeginning Father, and with thy
most holy, and good, and life-creating Spirit, now and ever, and to ages
of ages. Amen.

_And after the prayer the sixth priest straightway taketh a sixth twig,
and, dipping it in the holy oil, anointeth the sick person, saying the
prayer,_

Holy Father, physician of souls and bodies....

                             _Vide page 101._

_Deacon._ Let us attend.

_And the seventh priest._ Peace to all.

                         _Prokimenon, tone vii._

O Lord, rebuke me not in thy fury, neither chasten me in thine anger.

_Verse._ Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am weak.

          _The epistle to the Thessalonians, section cclxxiii._

Brethren, we exhort you.... _ending_, the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ.[27]

_And the seventh priest._ Peace to thee.

_Deacon._ Wisdom.

                          _Alleluia, tone vii._

_Verse._ The Lord hear thee in the day of trouble, the name of the God of
Jacob defend thee.

                 _The gospel from Matthew, section xxx._

At that time, Jesus, passing by.... _ending_, sinners to repentance.[28]

_And the deacon._ Have mercy upon us, O God....

Furthermore let us pray for mercy, life....

That to him may be remitted....

_And the exclamation._ For a merciful....

_The deacon saith_, Let us pray to the Lord.

                        _The priest, this prayer._

O Master, Lord our God, physician of souls and bodies, who restorest from
long-continued sufferings, healest every sickness and every wound among
the people, willest that all men should be saved and come to a knowledge
of the truth, and desirest not the death of a sinner, but that he should
return and live. For, thou, Lord, in the old testament didst appoint
repentance unto sinners, to David, and to the Ninevites, and to them that
were before these; but during the course of thine incarnate dispensation,
didst not call the righteous but sinners to repentance, even accepting
the publican, the harlot, the thief, and the blaspheming persecutor, the
great Paul, through repentance. Thou, through repentance, didst accept
Peter, the leader and thine apostle, who denied thee thrice, and didst
make promise unto him, saying, Thou art Peter, and upon this rock will
I build my church, and the gates of hades shall not prevail against it,
and I will give to thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven. Wherefore
we also, O good one and the lover of mankind, being bold according to
thine undeceiving promises, pray unto thee, and supplicate at this hour.
Hearken unto our prayer and accept it as incense offered unto thee, and
visit thy servant, _name_, and if he have sinned by word, or deed, or
intention, or in the night, or in the day, if he be under the curse of a
priest, or be fallen under his own curse, or be embittered by a curse,
and have forsworn himself, we supplicate thee, and to thee we pray,
Pardon, forgive, and loosen him, O God, overlooking his transgressions,
and the sins which in knowledge and in ignorance have been done by him.
And in whatsoever he have transgressed thy commandments, or have sinned,
because he beareth flesh and liveth in the world, or because of the
operation of the devil, do thou thyself, as the good and man-loving God,
loosen him; for there is no man that liveth and sinneth not: thou only
art without sin, thy righteousness is an everlasting righteousness, and
thy word is the truth. For thou didst not form man for destruction, but
for the keeping of thy commandments, and for the inheritance of life
incorruptible, and to thee we ascribe glory, with the Father, and with
the Holy Ghost, now and ever, and to ages of ages. Amen.

_And after the prayer the seventh priest taketh a seventh twig, and,
dipping it in the holy oil, anointeth the sick person, saying the prayer,_

Holy Father, physician of souls and bodies....

                             _Vide page 101._

_And after this, the sick person that receiveth the sacred unction, if
he be able, cometh himself into the midst of the priests, or, held by
his own people, standeth, or sitteth. And if he be not able, the priests
themselves stand around him lying on the bed. And the president, taking
the holy gospel and opening it, layeth the text upon the head of the sick
person, the book being held by all the priests. And he that is the leader
doth not lay on his hand, but he saith this prayer with a loud voice._

O Holy King, O loving-kind and most merciful Lord Jesus Christ, Son and
Word of the living God, who desirest not the death of a sinner, but that
he should return and live; I lay not my sinful hand upon the head of him
that cometh to thee in sins, and beseecheth of thee through us remission
of sins, but thy strong and mighty hand which is in this holy gospel
which my fellow-ministers hold upon the head of thy servant, _name_, and
I pray with them and entreat thy merciful love to man, which remembereth
not evil, O God, our Saviour, who, through thy prophet Nathan, didst
grant remission of his iniquities unto the repentant David, and didst
accept the prayer of repentance of Manasse; and do thou thyself, in thy
wonted love to man, accept thy servant, _name_, who bewaileth on account
of his own offences, and overlook all his iniquities. For thou art our
God, who hast bidden to forgive until seventy times seven them that have
fallen into sins; for as is thy greatness, so also is thy mercy, and to
thee is due every glory, honour, and worship, now and ever, and to ages
of ages. Amen.

_And taking the gospel from the head of the sick person, they present it
to him to kiss._

_And the deacon._ Have mercy upon us, O God....

Furthermore let us pray for mercy, life....

And that to him may be remitted....

                              _Exclamation._

For a merciful and man-loving....

               _Then they sing, Glory, idiomelon, tone iv._

Having a fountain of remedies, O holy unmercenary ones, ye bestow
healings unto all that are in need, as being counted worthy of mighty
gifts from the ever-flowing fountain of our Saviour. For the Lord hath
said unto you, as unto co-emulators of the apostles, Behold, I have
given unto you power over unclean spirits, so as to cast them out, and
to heal every sickness and every wound. Therefore in his commandments
having virtuously liv’d, freely ye receiv’d, freely ye bestow, healing
the sufferings of our souls and bodies.

                        _Both now, tone the same._

Attend unto the supplications of thy servants, thou altogether undefiled
one, quelling the uprisings of evils against us, and releasing us from
every affliction; for thee we have alone a sure and certain confirmation,
and we have gain’d thy mediation that we may not be put to shame, O
Queen, who call upon thee. Be instant in supplication for them that
faithfully exclaim to thee, Hail, Queen, thou aid of all, the joy and
safeguard, and salvation of our souls.

_Glory. Both now._ Lord, have mercy, _thrice_. Bless.

                                                      _And the dismissal._

Christ our true God, through the prayers of his most pure Mother,
through the power of the honourable and life-effecting cross, of the
holy, glorious, and all-praised James, apostle and first highpriest of
Jerusalem, the brother of God, and of all the Saints, save us and have
mercy upon us, as being good and the lover of mankind.

_And he that receiveth the prayer oil maketh reverence, saying,_

Bless me, holy fathers, and forgive me, a sinner.

                                                                 _Thrice._

_And, having received from them blessing and forgiveness, he departeth,
thanking God._

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




_Chapter XIV._

THE OFFICE WHEN IN EXTREME URGENCY OCCASION ARISETH TO GIVE COMMUNION TO
A SICK PERSON.


_The priest taketh a particle of the holy mysteries, and placeth it
in a chalice, and poureth thereunto a little wine, as much at may be
sufficient for the sick person to receive it._

_And he beginneth_, Blessed be our God, always, now.... _Then_,
Trisagion. _After_ Our Father.... Lord, have mercy, _xii_. O come, let us
worship.... _thrice_. I believe in one God.... _all to the end_.

                             _Then he saith,_

Of thy mysterious supper, Son of God, me a communicant accept to-day; for
I thy mystery to thy foes will not betray, nor give to thee a kiss as
Judas did; but, as the thief, I will confess thee: Lord, in thy kingdom O
remember me.

                                 _Glory._

O heavenly king, O comforter, Spirit of truth who art everywhere and
fillest all, treasury of blessings and giver of life; come and abide in
us, and cleanse us from all stain, and save our souls, O blessed one.

                         _Both now. Theotokion._

God-bearing Virgin, we have understood the God made flesh from thee, whom
do thou pray to save our souls.

Lord, have mercy, _xl_.

                           _Then this prayer._

Master, Lord Jesus Christ, our Saviour, who alone hast power to
forgive sins, as the good and man-loving God, do thou overlook all the
iniquities, in knowledge and in ignorance, of thy servant, _name_, and
count him worthy to partake, without condemnation, of thy most pure
mysteries, not to torment, nor to the increase of sins, but to the
cleansing of soul and body, and as an earnest of thy kingdom; for thou
art his assistance, and firm wall, and bulwark against the adversary, and
the cleansing of his iniquities. For thou art a merciful and man-loving
God, and to thee we ascribe glory, to the Father, and to the Son, and to
the Holy Ghost.

                             _Second prayer._

Lord, I know that I am not worthy that thou shouldest enter under my
roof, into the house of my soul; for it is all deserted and in ruins, and
thou hast not in me a fitting place where to lay thy head; but since thou
wishest to abide with me, trusting in thy compassions, I come unto thee.
Bid the doors of mine unworthy lips to open, that I may be satisfied with
thee alone; enter into me, and cleanse me from every bodily and spiritual
defilement; be thou my helper and defender, and count me worthy to stand
at thy right hand, through the prayers and supplications of our most pure
Lady, the God-bearing and Ever-virgin Mary, and of all the Saints, who
from ages have been acceptable unto thee; for blessed art thou to ages.
Amen.

                             _Third prayer._

The Lord God most merciful have compassion upon thee. The Lord Jesus
Christ bestow upon thee every good desire. The Lord Almighty deliver
thee from every calamity. The Lord teach thee. The Lord give thee
understanding. The Lord help thee. The Lord save thee. The Lord protect
thee. The Lord keep thee. The Lord cleanse thee. The Lord fill thee with
spiritual joy. The Lord be the defender of thy soul and body. The Lord,
as the merciful and good lover of mankind, bestow upon thee forgiveness
of sins. The Lord God Jesus Christ have mercy upon thee in the day of
judgment, and bless thee all the days of thy life. For to him is due all
glory, honour, and worship, with his unbeginning Father, and with his
most holy, good, and life-creating Spirit, now and ever, and to ages of
ages. Amen.

_And if the sick person shall have been previously confessed, let him
straightway communicate of the holy mysteries. But if not, the priest
biddeth them that are there present to retire for a short time, and he
interrogateth him concerning offences diverse and of many kinds, being
careful that nothing shall be concealed, or unconfessed because of shame.
And then, after the confession, the priest saith this prayer._

O Lord our God, who didst forgive sins unto Peter and unto the harlot
through their tears, and didst justify the publican who acknowledged his
iniquities; do thou accept the confession of thy servant, _name_, and
that wherein he hath sinned against thee, his voluntary and involuntary
sins, by word, or deed, or intention, as being good, do thou overlook.
For thou alone hast power to forgive sins, for thou art God merciful and
compassionate, and to thee we ascribe glory, to the Father, and to the
Son, and to the Holy Ghost, now and ever, and to ages of ages. Amen.

                     _After the communion he saith,_

Now dismiss thy servant, O Master.... _all to the end_. _Then_,
Trisagion. _After_ Our Father.... _the troparion of the day_.

                      _Glory. Both now. Theotokion._

Through the prayers, O Lord, of all the Saints, and of the God-bearing
one, grant us thy peace, and have mercy upon us, as being alone
compassionate.

Lord, have mercy, _thrice_. Bless.

                 _And the dismissal of the day that is._

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




_Chapter XV._

PRAYERFUL CANON TO OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST, AND TO THE MOST HOLY
GOD-BEARING MOTHER OF THE LORD AT THE PARTING OF THE SOUL FROM THE BODY
OF EVERY RIGHT-BELIEVER.


_The abbot cometh, but to a layman his spiritual father, and asketh if
through forgetfulness or shame he have any word or deed, or any malice
against a brother, unconfessed, or unforgiven: it is obligatory to
examine and interrogate the dying concerning all things one by one._

_After this he beginneth_, Blessed be our God.... _Trisagion._ _After_
Our Father.... Lord, have mercy, _xii_. O come, let us worship....
_thrice_. _Psalm l._ Have mercy upon me O God....

_A prayerful canon to the Most Holy God-bearing one, with the irmi to vi,
from the person of a man who is being parted from his soul, and who is
not able to speak._

                         _Tone vi. Ode i. Irmos._

Passing as on dry land....

_Refrain._ God-bearing one most holy, save thou us.

Like unto drops of rain, mine evil and brief days, becoming scant with
summer’s roll, already well-nigh vanish’d are: do thou save me, O Queen.

In thy benignity and many mercies, O thou Queen, in this dread hour, when
nature faileth, stand by me, an aid invincible.

Now mighty fear constrains my soul, it trembleth inexpressibly and
grieves: console it, thou Most Pure, as it the body quits.

                                 _Glory._

Known refuge of the sinful and the low, make known to me thy mercy, O
thou Pure, and me from demons’ hands set free; for like as many dogs they
me surround.

                               _Both now._

Lo, ’tis the time for help: lo, for thy mediation ’tis the time: lo, O
thou Queen, it is the time concerning which I have both day and night
with fervour cast me down and pray’d to thee.

                            _Ode iii. Irmos._

There is none holy like to thee, O Lord....

From long ago this day, O Queen, have I foreseen, and, ever musing
thereupon as though it had arriv’d, with fervent tears I thee have
pray’d, Forget me not.

They, roaring, me surround, the mental lions, and seek to seize and rend
me bitterly; but crush their teeth and jaws, O Pure, and save thou me.

Although henceforward be my vocal organs dumb, my tongue be bound, my
speech be stay’d, in heart’s contrition thee I pray, O my deliverer, save
thou me.

                                 _Glory._

Thine ear to me incline, Mother of Christ my God, from thy great glory’s
height, thou blessed one, and hear my latest sigh, and reach thy hand to
me.

                               _Both now._

Thy many mercies take thou not from me, nor close thy loving tenderness
for man ’gainst me, O Pure; but stand thou by me now, and in the hour of
judgment think on me.

                             _Ode iv. Irmos._

Christ is my might, the God and Lord....

Now make a flood of tears offences’ bath, thou that art good; my heart’s
contrition take; yea, blessed one, confirm my trust in thee, that thou
wilt free me from the fearful fiery pain; for thou, God-bearing one,
thyself art grace’s fount.

Thou that for all in need a refuge art, that put to shame is not, and all
offenceless is; be thou, O Queen most undefil’d, an advocate for me in
trial’s hour.

Thou stretchest forth thy most rever’d and precious hands in guise of
wings of dove divine, and ’neath their shade and shelter coverest me, O
Queen.

                                 _Glory._

By him, the prince of air, and him that violent is, and him that torturer
is, and him that standeth in the fearful ways, and by the false accusing
words of these, grant me to pass unovercome, when I depart from earth.

                               _Both now._

Lo, terror meeteth me, O Queen, and I have dread thereof. Behold, a great
event befalleth me, and O be thou therein a helper unto me, O trust of my
salvation thou.

                             _Ode v. Irmos._

With thy divine light, O blessed one....

Thou that art good, forget me not, nor from thy servant turn thy face;
but hear thou me, for I am griev’d, and O attend unto my soul, and rescue
this.

O ye my kinsfolk in the flesh, and ye my brethren in the spirit, and ye
my friends and comrades known, weep, sigh, lament; for lo, I now depart
from you.

Now none delivereth, and in truth nothing affordeth aid: be thou mine
aid, O Queen, lest I be as a man that hath no help, and in mine enemies’
hands enclos’d.

                                 _Glory._

Go, ye my holy Angels, stand at the judgment-seat of Christ, and bend
your spiritual knees, and tearfully exclaim to him, Have mercy, Maker of
all things, and, blessed one, reject thou not the work of thine own hands.

                               _Both now._

Unto the Queen bow ye yourselves, and my God’s most pure Mother pray
that she may bend her knees with you, and unto mercy him incline; for
hearken’d unto she will be, as Mother and as nurturer.

                             _Ode vi. Irmos._

Life’s sea perturbed....

My lips are silent, and my tongue speaks not, but my heart cries,
because, contrition’s fire consuming it within, it burns, and, with a
voice unutterable, invoketh thee, O Virgin.

Regard me from on high, O Mother of God, and mercifully now attend to
come and visit me, that, seeing thee, I may rejoice, departing from the
body.

When broken are the bonds, dissolv’d the laws of natural setting, and
those of every bodily substance, to need importable and straight they
subject me.

                                 _Glory._

Place me, O Queen, in holy Angels’ sacred and revered hands, that cover’d
by their wings, I may not see the forms devoid of grace, and foul, and
dark of demons.

                               _Both now._

Thou all-revered bridal-room of God, me worthy count to enter in the
heavenly spiritual bridal-room, enkindling with thy mercy’s holy oil my
quenched and unshining lamp.

                          _Condakion, tone vi._

My soul, my soul, arise, why sleepest thou? The end draws very near,
and thou hast need to pray. Then rouse thyself, that Christ God may
compassionate thee, he who is present everywhere, and filleth everything.

                                 _Icos._

Beholding open Christ’s remedial fount, and Adam drawing healing thence,
the devil, suffering, wounded was, wailed as they who ill receive, and
cried to those conjoin’d with him, What shall I do to Mary’s Son? He
killeth me, the Bethleemite, he who is present everywhere, and filleth
everything.

                            _Ode vii. Irmos._

The angel made the furnace to bedew....

Me unprepar’d death’s dark and moonless night o’ertaken hath, and
journeying unprepar’d, along that straight and fearful way, O may thy
mercy company me, O Queen.

Lo, verily, all my days in vanity wasted are, as hath been written, and
my years with care, and deadly bitter snares, in truth, prevented have my
soul, and these me still constrain.

Let not the number of my sins thy great beneficence exceed, O Queen; but
let thy mercy come on me, and all mine oversteppings do thou hide.

                                 _Glory._

Leading me hence they go, on all sides binding me, and, fill’d with much
rebellion, quelled is my soul, and fears; but, O thou Pure, with thine
appearance, do thou it appease.

                               _Both now._

In mine affliction have I no one found to mourn with me and comfort me, O
Queen; for mine acquaintances and friends have now together quitted me;
but, thou who art my trust, do thou forsake me not.

                            _Ode viii. Irmos._

From flame thou didst a dew outpour on reverend ones....

As God’s man-loving Mother, be man-loving thou, with gentle eyes and
merciful regarding me, as from the body goes my soul, that thee I ever
may extol, thou holy Bringer-forth of God.

Me worthy count to overcome the hosts of bodiless foes, to mount th’
aërial space and enter heaven, that thee I ever may extol, thou holy
Bringer-forth of God.

Thou who didst bear th’ Almighty Lord, from me far keep away the
world-controlling prince of bitter guiles when I approach mine end, that
thee I ever may extol, thou holy Bringer-forth of God.

                                 _Glory._

When the great final trump shall sound, arousing all to resurrection
menacing and dread, O then do thou remember me, thou holy Bringer-forth
of God.

                               _Both now._

Palace high rais’d of Christ the Lord, send from on high thy grace, and
now in trouble’s day prevent thou me, that I may ever thee extol, thou
holy Bringer-forth of God.

                             _Ode ix. Irmos._

Mortals may not see God....

O how shall I th’ invisible behold? how that most dreadful vision bear?
how venture to lift up mine eyes? how dare my Master to regard, whom,
from my youth, I never ceased have to give offence?

Thou holy maiden, Bringer-forth of God, look on my lowliness with tender
heart; accept thou this, my last and penitential prayer; and make thou
speed to rescue me from the tormenting endless fire.

My soul, that temples holy hath defil’d, having a stain’d and bodily
temple left, beseecheth thee, O maiden, Virgin Mother, that it may ’scape
the gloom profound, and fierce gehenna’s flame.

                                 _Glory._

Seeing the end of life draw near, and on my most unseemly thoughts and
deeds bethinking me, O thou All-pure, the darts of conscience fiercely
wound mine active soul; but O in mercy turn thyself to me, and be mine
advocate.

                               _Both now._

The Son in mercy gave himself for us, the Son of God and angels’ King
eterne, becoming man from thy pure blood; move him to mercy on my
passionate soul, O Maid, which is with violence from my wretched body
torn.

_Then_, It is very meet....




_Prayer said by the priest at the departure of a soul._


O Master, Lord Almighty, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who desirest
that all men should be saved and come to a knowledge of the truth; who
desirest not the death of a sinner, but that he should return and live;
we pray and make supplication unto thee, Loosen the soul of thy servant,
_name_, from every bond, and deliver him from every curse: forgive him
the iniquities, known and unknown, which from youth up, in deed and
word, he hath confessed sincerely, or, through forgetfulness or shame
hath hidden; for thou alone art he that looseth them that are in bonds,
and setteth upright them that are crushed down, thou hope of them that
have no hope, who canst remit the sins of every man that hath a trust
in thee. Yea, O man-loving Lord, bid that he be set free from carnal and
sinful bonds, and receive in peace the soul of this thy servant, _name_,
and rest it in the eternal habitations with thy Saints, through the grace
of thine only-begotten Son, our Lord God and Saviour, Jesus Christ, with
whom also thou art blessed, together with thy most holy, and good, and
life-creating Spirit, now and ever, and to ages of ages. Amen.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




_Chapter XVI._

THE MORTUARY ORDER OVER LAY BODIES.


_On the decease of one of the right-believers, his kinsfolk straightway
send for the priest, who cometh to the house in which the remains of
him that hath fallen asleep lie, and putting on the epitrachelion, and
putting incense into the censer, censeth the body of the dead, and them
that stand by, and beginneth as customarily,_

Blessed be our God....

                       _And the bystanders begin,_

Holy God.... O most holy Trinity.... Our Father.... For thine is the
kingdom....

           _And straightway they sing these troparia. Tone iv._

With the spirits of the righteous dead, O Saviour, rest thy servant’s
soul, keeping it in that blessed life which is with thee, thou lover of
mankind.

In thy resting-place, O Lord, where all thy Saints repose, O rest thy
servant’s soul; for thou alone art lover of mankind.

                                 _Glory._

Thou art the God that wentest down to hades, and didst burst the
captives’ bonds: rest also thou thyself thy servant’s soul.

                               _Both now._

O only pure and spotless Virgin, who without seed didst bring forth God,
pray that his soul be sav’d.

                           _The deacon saith,_

Have mercy upon us, O God, according to thy great mercy, we pray thee,
hear, and have mercy.

Lord, have mercy, _thrice_.

Furthermore let us pray for the repose of the soul of the servant of God,
_name_, who hath fallen asleep, and that to him may be remitted every
transgression, voluntary and involuntary.

Lord, have mercy, _thrice_.

The mercy of God, the kingdom of heaven, and the forgiveness of his sins,
we ask of thee, O Christ, our immortal King and God.

Vouchsafe, O Lord.

_Deacon._ Let us pray to the Lord.

Lord have mercy.

                     _The priest saith this prayer,_

O God of spirits and of every flesh, who didst tread down death, and
overcome the devil, and bestow life upon thy world; do thou thyself, O
Lord, rest the soul of thy servant, _name_, who hath fallen asleep, in
a place of light, in a place of refreshment, in a place of rest, whence
pain, and grief, and sighing are driven away; and every iniquity wrought
by him, in word, or deed, or in intention, as the good man-loving God,
do thou remit; for there is no man that shall live and shall not sin;
for thou alone art without sin, thy righteousness is an everlasting
righteousness, and thy word the truth.

                              _Exclamation._

For thou art the resurrection and the life, and the repose of thy
servant, _name_, who hath fallen asleep, O Christ our God, and to thee we
ascribe glory, with thine unbeginning Father, and with thy most holy, and
good, and life-creating Spirit, now and ever, and to ages of ages. Amen.

_Deacon._ Wisdom.

_Choir._ The more honourable than the Cherubim.... _And the rest._

_And straightway the dismissal is made by the priest on this wise,_

He that hath dominion over quick and dead, Christ our true God, through
the prayers of his most pure Mother, of our venerable and god-bearing
fathers, and of all his Saints, place the soul of his servant, _name_,
departed from us, in holy tabernacles, and number it with the just, and
have mercy upon us, as being good and the lover of mankind.

_And then if all things be ready for the departure, the priest again
maketh the beginning,_

Blessed be our God....

_And we begin to sing_, Holy God.... _with fear, and with every
compunction_.

_And taking up the remains of him that hath fallen asleep, we go forth to
the temple; preceded by the priests with tapers, and the deacon with the
censer._

_And when they come unto the temple, then the remains are placed in the
porch, (or in the temple, as is here in great Russia the custom.)_

                            _And they begin,_

Whoso dwelleth under the defence of the Most High....[29]

_And after this they sing with a loud voice,_

Blessed art thou, O Lord: O teach me thy statutes.

The undefiled in the way. Alleluia.

_And the first stasis of the undefiled[30] is sung to tone vi, and at the
end of every verse we sing,_ Alleluia.

Blessed are the undefiled in the way, that walk in the law of the Lord.
Alleluia.

Blessed are they that, searching out his testimonies, seek him with the
whole heart. Alleluia.

_And the rest of the psalm. Glory._ Alleluia.

_Both now._ Alleluia.

_Deacon._ Again and again in peace let us pray to the Lord.

Furthermore let us pray for the repose of the soul of the servant of God,
_name_, who hath fallen asleep, and that to him may be remitted every
transgression, voluntary and involuntary.

That the Lord God may place his soul where the righteous rest.

The mercy of God, the kingdom of heaven, and the forgiveness of his sins
let us ask of Christ, our immortal King and God.

Vouchsafe, O Lord.

_Deacon._ Let us pray to the Lord.

Lord have mercy.

                     _The priest saith this prayer._

O God of spirits.... _Vide page 139._

_And after this they begin the second stasis in tone v, in which also, at
the ending of a verse, we say,_

Have mercy upon thy servant.

_The choir beginneth_, Thy commandments.

Have mercy upon thy servant.

                         _Again the same choir,_

Thy hands have made me, and fashioned me: O give me understanding, and I
shall be taught by thy commandment.

Have mercy upon thy servant.

They that fear thee beheld me and rejoiced, for I have trusted in thy
words.

Have mercy upon thy servant.

           _And the rest of the psalm, and at the end, Glory._

Have mercy upon thy servant. _Both now._

Have mercy upon thy servant.

_Deacon._ Again and again.... _Vide page 142._

_And again they begin the third stasis in the third tone._

Thy name. Alleluia.

                     _Again the same choir singeth,_

Look upon me, and have mercy upon me, according to the judgment of them
that love thy name. Alleluia.

Direct my steps according to thy word, and let not every transgression
have dominion over me. Alleluia.

           _And the rest. And, after the ending, straightway,_

           _Blessed art thou, O Lord: O teach me thy statutes._

The choir of saints have found life’s spring, and paradise’s door; and
may I also find the way through penitence. I am a wandering sheep: O
Saviour, me recall, and save thou me.

                      _Blessed art thou, O Lord...._

Ye saints, that preach’d the Lamb of God, and sacrificed were as lambs,
and unto life that grows not old and aye endures translated are; this
ceaselessly, ye martyrs, pray, that unto us vouchsaf’d may be remission
of our trespasses.

                      _Blessed art thou, O Lord...._

O ye that walk’d the narrow way, that ever-suffering is; all ye that
during life accepted have as yoke the cross, and follow’d me in faith;
come, and enjoy those things prepar’d for you, rewards and crowns
celestial.

                      _Blessed art thou, O Lord...._

Of thy narrateless glory I an image am, and, though I bear offences’
scars, compassionate thy creature, Lord, and cleanse me in thy
tenderness, and the desired fatherland give thou to me, a citizen of
paradise me making once again.

                      _Blessed art thou, O Lord...._

Thou who of old didst form me out of nothingness, and with thy godlike
image didst adorn, but, for transgressing the commands, didst turn again
to earth, whereout I taken was, to that which sembleth thee do thou me
call once more, shaping again the erewhile comeliness.

                      _Blessed art thou, O Lord...._

O rest thy servant, God, and O in paradise appoint his place, where
choirs of saints and righteous ones, O Lord, are luminous as stars: O to
thy sleeping servant give thou rest, and pass all his offences by.

                                 _Glory._

The tri-illuminating of the Godhead one let us with reverence
sing, exclaiming, Thou, O Father unbeginning, holy art, and thou,
co-unbeginning Son, and thou, O Spirit Divine: enlighten us who serve
thee faithfully, and save us from eternal fire.

                               _Both now._

Hail, pure one, who didst bring forth God in flesh for all men’s saving,
through whom the human race hath found salvation! through thee may we
find paradise, God-bearing one, who pure and blessed art. Alleluia,
_thrice_.

_Then the deacon_, Again and again.... _Vide page 142._

_And, after the exclamation, we sing the present troparia, tone v._

Our Saviour, rest thy servant with the just, and place him in thy
courts, as it is written, as being good, despising his iniquities, both
willing ones and those unwilling, and all those done in knowledge and in
ignorance, O lover of mankind.

                           _Glory. Conclusion._

And all those done in knowledge and in ignorance, O lover of mankind.

                         _Both now. Theotokion._

Christ God, who from the Virgin shinedst to the world, who hast through
her made manifest the sons of light, have mercy thou on us.

_Then psalm l, and the canon, whereof the acrostic is,_

To him that is departed a sixth song I address. _Theophany._

                         _Ode i. Tone vi. Irmos._

Passing as on dry land....

In heavenly palaces the noble martyrs ever pray thee, Christ, Him whom
thou hast remov’d from earth, a faithful one, count worthy to attain
eternal blessedness.

Thou that adornest everything, mid life compound createdst me a man,
lowly and also great. Then, Saviour, rest thy servant’s soul.

                                 _Glory._

A citizen and husbandman of paradise in the beginning thou appointedst
me; but thou didst exile me for breaking thy command. Then, Saviour, rest
thy servant’s soul.

                         _Both now. Theotokion._

He that aforetime from a rib our protomother Eva form’d, from thy pure
womb assumed flesh, and thereby hath annull’d the might of death, thou
Pure.

                            _Ode iii. Irmos._

There is none holy like to thee, O Lord....

Thy martyrs suffer’d lawfully, O Giver of life, and with a crown of
victory adorn’d, they ceaselessly bestow on the departed faithful one an
everlasting ransoming.

For me, a wanderer, taught erewhile by signs and wonders many, thou hast
at last thyself made void, as sympathiser, and, seeking, me hast found
and sav’d.

                                 _Glory._

Him that departs to thee from streams of transient mortal life, count
worthy to abide with joy in tabernacles that eternal be, him justifying,
Blessed One, by faith and grace.

                         _Both now. Theotokion._

There is none undefil’d as thou, God’s Mother thou most pure; for thou
alone didst in the womb conceive the true eternal God, who hath annull’d
the power of death.

_Deacon._ Again and again.... _Vide page 142._

                           _Kathisma, tone vi._

Verily everything is vain, and life a shadow is, a dream; for vainly
every earth-born one disquieteth himself, as saith the scripture. When
we have gain’d the world, then dwell we in the grave, where kings and
beggars are as one. Therefore, Christ God, as lover of mankind, to thy
departed servant give thou rest.

                      _Glory. Both now. Theotokion._

All-holy Bringer-forth of God, in my life’s time forsake me not, to human
mediation leave me not; but me thyself defend, and be thou merciful to me.

                             _Ode iv. Irmos._

Christ is my might, the God and Lord....

Of greatest wisdom shewing sign, and of rewards’ perfectionment, O
gracious Lord, with Angels thou the choirs of martyrs number’d hast.

Of thy narrateless glory count him worthy to participate, who unto thee
translated is, where, Christ, their dwelling is who joy, and where pure
gladness’ voice resounds.

                                 _Glory._

Him that extols thy might divine, whom thou from earth received hast,
do thou accept, creating him a child of light; and cleanse him from the
gloom of sin, O thou Most Merciful.

                         _Both now. Theotokion._

O tabernacle thou most pure, temple all-undefil’d, all-holy ark, virginal
place of sanctity, of Jacob thou the excellence, the Lord hath chosen
thee.

                             _Ode v. Irmos._

With thy divine light, O Blessed One....

Like an oblation sacred, and human nature’s first-fruits, the martyrs,
who were offer’d for God’s glorifying, for our salvation ever mediate.

Of heavenly dwelling, of grace’s distribution, thy faithful servant gone
before, count worthy, Lord, and give him ransom from iniquities.

                                 _Glory._

Thou that alone by nature life-effector art, and grace’s trackless
depth, him that is gone, count worthy of thy kingdom, Pitiful, thou sole
immortal one.

                         _Both now. Theotokion._

The strength, and song, and saving of the lost is he become that to the
world was born of thee, O Queen, delivering them, who thee in faith call
bless’d, from hades’ gates.

                             _Ode vi. Irmos._

Life’s sea perturb’d....

Nail’d on the cross the choir of martyrs thou hast gather’d to thyself,
them that thy passion imitate, O Blessed One. Therefore, we thee beseech,
Rest him that now betaketh him to thee.

When thou in thy narrateless glory all the world to judge shalt on the
clouds in terror come, Deliverer, be thou pleas’d that he, thy faithful
servant, whom thou from earth received hast, may meet thee shiningly.

                                 _Glory._

Being life’s fount, O Lord, who, through divine humanity, didst lead the
fetter’d forth; thy servant, who to thee in faith is gone, place thou in
joys of paradise.

                         _Both now. Theotokion._

We have been turned back to earth for breaking the divine command of
God; but, through thee, Virgin, unto heaven from earth are rais’d again,
shaking off death’s corruption.

_Deacon._ Again and again.... _Vide page 142._

                         _Condakion, tone viii._

Rest with the Saints, O Christ, thy servant’s soul, where is no pain, nor
grief, nor sighing, but life that endeth not.

                                 _Icos._

Thyself alone immortal art, who madest and didst fashion man; for out of
earth we mortals fashion’d were, and unto that same earth shall go, as
thou who madest me hast given command, and sayest unto me, Earth thou
art, and unto earth shalt thou return. And thither all we mortals go,
making the funeral wail, even the song, the Alleluia.

                               _And again._

Rest with the Saints, O Christ....

                            _Ode vii. Irmos._

The angel made the furnace to bedew....

From the primeval fall were sav’d the martyrs by thy blood, and, with
their own blood sprinkled, they clearly thy slaying image forth. Blessed
art thou, our fathers’ God.

O life-originating Word, thou hast slain raging death; and him O now
receive, O Christ, who sleeps in faith, and sings, and says, Blessed art
thou, our fathers’ God.

                                 _Glory._

Divine-originating Lord, who me, a man, with breath divine sufflated
hast; vouchsafe thy kingdom unto him departed hence, who, Saviour, sings
to thee, Blessed art thou, our fathers’ God.

                         _Both now. Theotokion._

Most undefil’d, conceiving God, who crush’d death’s gates and burst the
bars, thou higher than all creatures art. Therefore, we faithful thee, O
pure, extol as Mother of God.

                            _Ode viii. Irmos._

From flame thou didst a dew outpour on reverend ones....

Martyrs of Christ, who sufferings bore, who in the strifes were steadfast
prov’d, ye are adorn’d with victory’s crown, crying, O Christ, to ages
thee we set on high.

The faithful ones who life depart in sacred wise, and unto thee, O
Master, go, gently, as loving-kind, receive, that they may rest, and thee
to ages set on high.

                                 _Glory._

Now in the land of gentle ones, Saviour, be pleas’d to stablish all who
fallen have on sleep afore, and who in thee, by faith and grace, are
justified, and thee to ages set on high.

                         _Both now. Theotokion._

All-blessed one, we thee all bless, who didst bring forth the Word who is
blessed indeed, who for our sake incarnate was, and whom on high to ages
we set up.

                             _Ode ix. Irmos._

Mortals may not see God....

Hope made the choirs of martyrs strong, and flam’d them ardently towards
thy love, prefiguring unto those to come a rest in verity undisturb’d;
and unto this, O Blessed One, may thy departed faithful one be counted
worthy to attain.

Of thine illumination, Christ, which bright and godlike is, be pleas’d
that he, departed hence in faith, may share, to him, as being merciful,
in Abraham’s bosom giving rest, and granting him eternal blessedness.

                                 _Glory._

O thou that art by nature good and loving-kind, and mercy willest, and a
depth of loving-kindness art, his lot, whom, Saviour, thou from this ill
place removed hast, and from the shades of death, appoint where shines
thy light.

                         _Both now. Theotokion._

A holy tabernacle thee we own to be, O Pure, an ark likewise, and
breastplate of the law and grace; for pardon is bestow’d, through thee,
on them, All-undefil’d, that have, by his blood justified been, who of
thy womb incarnate was.

_Deacon._ Again and again in peace let us pray to the Lord. _Vide page
142._

                _We begin the idiomela of John the monk._

                                _Tone i._

What sweet of life abideth unaccompanied with grief? what glory stayeth
upon earth unchang’d? All is the feeblest shade, all the most cheating
dream: one moment, and death taketh all these things. But in thy face’s
light, O Christ, and in the sweetness of thy beauty, grant rest to him
whom thou hast call’d, as lover of mankind.

                                _Tone ii._

Woe unto me, what agony hath the soul when it is from the body torn!
alas, then how it weeps, and none is merciful to it! To Angels lifting
eyes, without effect it prays; to men extending hands, it findeth none to
help. Therefore, my brethren lov’d, musing on our brief life, let us for
the departed ask for rest from Christ, and for great mercy for our souls.

                               _Tone iii._

All human things are vanity which last not after death: riches abide not,
nor doth glory stay; for when death cometh, these all disappear. Then let
us cry to the immortal Christ, O rest him who is gone away from us where
is the dwelling-place of all that joy.

                                _Tone iv._

Where is the predilection of the world? where their imaginings who
fade? where is the silver and the gold? where servants’ multitude and
noise? All dust, all ashes, all a shade. But, come ye, let us say to
the immortal King, O Lord, him, who hath been remov’d from us, of thine
eternal blessings worthy count, him resting in thine ageless happiness.

                                _Tone v._

I remember’d what the prophet said, I am earth, and I am dust; and again
I meditated in the graves, and saw the naked bones, and said, Who now is
king, or warrior who, or who is rich, or who is poor, or who the just, or
he that sinn’d? But, with the just, thy servant rest, O Lord.

                                _Tone vi._

To me thy life-effecting bidding was substance and origin; for, willing
me to form a living one from nature that unseen is and is seen, my body
thou didst make of earth, and, by thy breathing life-creating and divine,
me gavest soul. Therefore, O Christ, thy servant rest in tract of them
that living are, and in the dwellings of the just.

                               _Tone vii._

After thine image and resemblance in the beginning making man, in
paradise thou him didst place to be of thy creation lord; but, by the
devil’s enviousness beguil’d, he ate the fruit, transgressing thy
commands. Therefore, again to earth, whence he was taken, thou hast
doom’d him to return, O Lord, and beg for rest.

                               _Tone viii._

I weep and I lament when I reflect on death, and see the comeliness,
according to God’s image, that was shap’d for us lying in the graves
disfigured, and bereft of glory and of form. O wonder! what is this
mystery concerning us? how to corruption have we been assign’d? how unto
death conjoin’d? Verily by God’s command, as it is written, who giveth
the departed rest.

                        _The beatitudes, tone vi._

When in thy kingdom thou shalt come, O Lord, remember us.

Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted.

Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth.

Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they
shall be filled.

Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.

Christ, who, aforetime, for his penitence, didst make the thief a citizen
of paradise when on the cross to thee he cried, Remember me, of this even
me, unworthy, worthy count.

Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.

Thou who dominion hast o’er life and death, rest in the courts of saints
him whom from things of time thou taken hast; and think on me, when in
thy kingdom thou shalt come.

Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of God.

Thou who o’er souls and bodies lordship hast, thou in whose hand is held
our breath, who mourners’ consolation art; rest in the land of righteous
ones thy servant whom thou hast removed hence.

Blessed are they that are persecuted for righteousness’ sake....

Christ rest thee in the land of living ones, and open paradise’s gates to
thee, and of the kingdom thee declare a citizen, and give thee pardon of
those things wherein in life thou sinned hast, O thou of Christ belov’d.

Blessed are ye when men shall revile you....

Let us go forth and muse among the graves; for man is naked bones, the
food of worms, and of an odour ill; and let us learn what riches are,
yea, beauty, strength, and comeliness.

Rejoice, and be exceeding glad....

Let us give ear to what the Almighty saith, Woe unto them that seek to
see the Lord’s most fearful day! for it is one of gloom: for everything
with fire shall be tried.

                                 _Glory._

By the unbeginningness, and the begetting, and the proceeding, I bow me
to the Father who begat, the Son begotten I extol, I sing the Holy Ghost,
co-shining with the Father and the Son.

                         _Both now. Theotokion._

How, Virgin, from thy breast flow’d milk? how didst thou nurture him,
creation’s nurturer? It was as was the springing forth of water from the
rock, as streams of waters for a thirsty folk, as hath been written.

_After this the deacon saith_, Let us attend.

_Priest._ Peace to all.

              _And the choir singeth, prokimenon, tone vi,_

Blessed is the way wherein thou goest to-day, O soul, because a place of
rest hath been prepared for thee.

_Verse._ Unto thee have I cried, O Lord.

_Deacon._ Wisdom.

_Reader. The epistle to the Thessalonians, section cclxx._

Brethren, I would not have you to be ignorant ... _ending_, be ever with
the Lord.[31]

_Priest._ Peace to thee. _Alleluia._

                                _Tone vi._

Blessed is he whom thou hast chosen and received, O Lord.

                   _The gospel from John, section xvi._

The Lord spake unto the Jews that came unto him, Verily, verily, I say
unto you ... _ending_, the Father which hath sent me.[32]

                                _Deacon._

Have mercy upon us, O God, according to thy great mercy, we pray thee,
hear, and have mercy.

Lord, have mercy, _thrice_.

Furthermore let us pray for the repose of the soul of the servant of God,
_name_, who hath fallen asleep, and that to him may be remitted every
transgression, voluntary and involuntary.

Lord, have mercy, _thrice_.

That the Lord God may place his soul where the righteous rest.

Lord, have mercy, _thrice_.

The mercy of God, the kingdom of heaven, and the forgiveness of his sins
let us ask of Christ, our immortal King and God.

Vouchsafe, O Lord.

_Deacon._ Let us pray to the Lord.

Lord, have mercy.

_And after the conclusion of this the first of the priests, or the
archpriest, if one happen to be there, saith the prayer_, O God of
spirits.... _with a loud voice, standing nigh unto the dead._

_And in like manner all the priests that be present._

_And be it known that as many times as the petition is said by the
deacon, while the petition is being said by him, each of the priests in
his order saith the above mentioned prayer in a low voice nigh unto the
dead, and exclaimeth,_

For thou art the resurrection....

_And now by the first priest, or by the archpriest, the prayer_, O God
of spirits.... _is said with a loud voice, as is mentioned above._

             _And, after the exclamation, the kiss is given._

_And we sing the present stichera of similar rhythm._

When from the tree....

                                                                _Tone ii._

Come, brethren, let us give the last kiss to the dead, and render thanks
to God; for he hath left his kinsfolk, and hasteneth to the grave: to
him there is no care concerning vanities and carnal toil. Where now are
kinsfolk and where friends? Lo, we are parted from him, whom, Lord, we
pray thee to give rest.

What, O ye brethren, is this parting? what this weeping? what this
wailing in the present hour? Come, kiss ye then him whom but lately
was with us; for he is given to the grave, is cover’d with a stone, in
darkness dwelleth, is buried with the dead, and now is parted from all
kinsfolk and from friends; and him, O Lord, we pray thee to give rest.

Now is life’s evil boast of vanity destroy’d; for from its dwelling-place
the soul is gone, the clay is ashen, the casket broken, it voiceless is,
no feeling hath, is dead and motionless. And him consigning to the grave,
let us beseech the Lord to give him everlasting rest.

What is our life? a flower, a smoke, and, verily, a morning dew. O come
ye then, let us, with open eyes, regard the graves. Where is the beauty
of the body? where youth? where eyes, and carnal form? All are consum’d
as grass, all vanish’d. Come, fall we down to Christ in tears.

Great is the weeping and the wailing, great is the sighing and the need
at parting from the soul. Hades and destruction wait; and transitory life
appears a fleeting shade, a dream of error; and the toil of earthly life
unseemly phantasy. Far let us fly from every worldly sin, that heaven may
be our heritage.

Gazing on him that lieth dead, O take we all a likeness of our final
hour; for he is pass’d as vapour from the earth, is wither’d as a flower,
as grass cut down, wrapp’d in a winding-sheet, and hid in earth. And,
leaving him unseen, let us pray Christ to give him everlasting rest.

Adam’s descendants, come ye, let us see laid low in earth a likeness of
ourselves, which hath all beauty lost, is in the grave’s decay dissolv’d,
in darkness is by worms consum’d, and in the earth is hid. And, leaving
him unseen, let us pray Christ to give him everlasting rest.

When from the body parted is the soul by force by Angels dread, all
kinsfolk and acquaintance it forgets, and is impress’d concerning
standing at the judgment-seat to come, that shall decide the things of
vanity and carnal toil. Then, praying to the judge, let us all beg the
Lord to pardon him what he hath done.

Come, brethren, let us within the grave behold the ashes and the dust
whereof we formed were. Where go we now? and what become? what is the
poor, or what the rich? or what the lord, and what the free? Are not all
dust? The beauty of the countenance is gone, and death hath wasted all
the flower of youth.

Verily vain and perishing are all the things of life, seeming, and
gloriousless; for we all go away, all die, kings and princes, judges and
them that mighty be, the rich and poor, and every mortal man; for now
they that aforetime liv’d are cast into the grave, whom that the Lord may
rest we pray.

Now all the organs of the body idle are beheld, which active were but
late, all without motion, without feeling, dead; for closed are the eyes,
the feet are bound, the hands are listless, and with them the ears; the
tongue is clos’d in silence, consigned to the grave: all human things are
vanity indeed.

Save them that put their trust in thee, O Mother of the Sun that setteth
not, thou Bringer-forth of God: with thine entreaties, we beseech thee,
pray the most good God to rest him now departed hence where rest the
righteous souls; him of divine good things declare thou heir in halls of
righteous ones, unto remembrance everlasting, thou all undefil’d.

                            _Glory. Tone vi._

Me, lying voiceless and depriv’d of breath, beholding, bewail ye me,
O brethren and O friends, O kinsfolk and acquaintances; for yesterday
I spake with you, and suddenly on me came the dread hour of death.
But, come ye, all that love me, and kiss me with the final kiss; for
never shall I go with you again, or further converse hold with you. For
I depart unto the judge, where no respect of persons is, where slave
and lord together stand, the king and warrior, rich and poor, in equal
worthiness; for each, according to his deeds, is glorified or sham’d.
But I beg all, and all entreat unceasingly to pray Christ God for me,
that, for my sins, I be not bidden unto torment’s place, but that he may
appoint my lot where is the light of life.

                  _Both now. Theotokion, the same tone._

Through her entreaties who to thee gave birth, O Christ, and those of thy
forerunner, and of apostles, prophets, hierarchs, venerables, and just,
and of all Saints, unto thy sleeping servant give thou rest.

_Then_, Trisagion. O most holy Trinity.... Our Father....

_Priest._ For thine is the kingdom....

_Then_, With the spirits of the righteous.... _and the rest_.

_The petition by the deacon_, Have mercy upon us, O God, according to thy
great mercy....

_Vide page 142. And after the exclamation, Glory. Both now. And the
dismissal._

He that arose from the dead, Christ our true God, through the prayers of
his most pure Mother, of the holy glorious and all-praised apostles, of
our venerable and God-bearing fathers, and of all the Saints, place the
soul of his servant, _name_, departed from us, in the tabernacles of the
just, rest it in the bosom of Abraham, and number it with the righteous,
and have mercy upon us, as being good and the lover of mankind. Amen.

_And the archpriest, or the principal priest, saith himself this thrice._

Thy remembrance is everlasting, O our deservedly blessed and ever
remembered brother.

                                _Thrice._

                     _Then the singers sing thrice,_

                         Everlasting remembrance.

_And straightway the archpriest, if he happen to be there, or the priest,
readeth the prayer of absolution with a loud voice._

The Lord Jesus Christ our God, who gave divine commandments unto his
holy disciples and apostles to bind and loose the sins of the fallen,
and from whom we have again received authority to do the like, forgive
thee, O spiritual child, whatever thou hast done in the life that now is,
voluntarily or involuntarily, now and ever, and to ages of ages. Amen.

_And so, taking up the remains, we go forth to the grave, followed by all
the people, and preceded by the priests, and singing_, Holy God.... O
most holy Trinity.... Our Father.... _and the rest_.

_And they lay the remains in the grave; and the archpriest, or the
priest, taking earth upon a shovel, casteth it crosswise over the
remains, saying,_

The earth is the Lord’s, and the fulness thereof, the world and all they
that dwell therein.

_And after this he poureth over the remains oil from the lamp, or
scattereth ashes out of the censer, and so they fill up the grave as
customarily, meantime singing the troparia_, With the spirits of the
righteous.... _and all the rest. Vide page 138._

                           _And the dismissal._




[Illustration]




_Chapter XVII._

THE ORDINANCE THAT IS OBSERVED CONCERNING THE CARRYING FORTH OF THEM THAT
FALL ASLEEP IN HOLY PASCHA, AND IN ALL THE BRIGHT WEEK.


It behoveth to know that if any pass away on holy pascha, or on any day
whatever of the bright week until the sunday of Thomas, somewhat less of
the customary song for them that have fallen asleep is sung, because of
the majesty and honour of the joyful festival of the resurrection; for
it is a festival of joy and gladness, and not of lamentation. And since
all who die in hope of resurrection and eternal life are through the
resurrection of Christ, removed from the griefs of this world to things
that are joyful and glad, the church at the time when Christ is risen
proclaimeth this by the resurrection song over them that have fallen
asleep; and, by somewhat less song, ectenias and prayer for them that
have fallen asleep, we are assured that he that dieth in penitence, if
he have not yet made satisfaction concerning his iniquities, these are
remitted to him by the prayers of the church, and that he is freed from
their bond.

_The priest then having come, with his clerks, to the house in which
the body of the dead lieth, and put on him the epitrachelion and the
phelonion, and censed the remains, beginneth as customarily,_

Blessed be our God.... _And the clerk singeth_, Christ is risen.... _in
tone v. And the priest saith the customary verses, that is to say,_ Let
God arise.... _and all the rest_.

_And while these are being sung, the priest sprinkleth the body of the
dead with sanctified water, and his coffin without and within, and
straightway they lay him therein. And, the song being ended, the deacon
saith the customary ectenias for them that have fallen asleep. And the
priest in a low voice readeth the prayer, that is to say_, O God of
Spirits.... _Vide page 139. And after the exclamation they read,_

Having seen the resurrection of Christ....

_And taking up the remains of him that hath fallen asleep, they go forth
to the church, the priests, deacons, and every clerk going before, and
the lay people following; and, as they go, the clerks and singers sing
the paschal canon, that is to say_, It is the day of resurrection....

_This in order until they come even unto the church. And in the church,
having put down the remains, they conclude the canon that hath been
begun, while the priests cense according to the customary rite. And at
the fourth ode, the customary diaconals for them that have fallen asleep,
with the prayer._

                           _And he exclaimeth,_

For thou art the resurrection, and the life....

_Then_, Preventing the dawn....

_And after this the ivth ode is sung in order._

_And after the sixth ode, the customary diaconals for them that have
fallen asleep with the prayer._

_And he exclaimeth_, For thou art the resurrection and the life....

_Then the condakion_, Rest with the saints.

_And the icos_, Thyself alone immortal art.... _Vide page 149._

                     _And, instead of the trisagion,_

As many as have been baptized into Christ....

_The epistle in the Acts for the day being.[33] Alleluia in tone ii._

                   _The first resurrection gospel._[34]

_And after this_, Having seen the resurrection of Christ, we adore....

                    _And the other odes of the canon._

_And after the conclusion of the canon is read or sung the
exapostilarion_, Asleep in flesh.... _twice_.

_After these we sing_, Blessed art thou, O Lord: O teach me thy statutes.

The angelic council was amaz’d....

            _Then the stichera of pascha, with their verses._

                            _Glory. Both now._

It is the day of resurrection.... and Christ is risen.... _thrice_.

_And these stichera having been sung, the customary kiss of him that hath
fallen asleep taketh place, saying,_

Christ is risen.

_And after the stichera the customary diaconals for them that have
fallen asleep with the prayer, which is read with a loud voice by the
archpriest, or the priest, nigh unto the remains._

                           _And he exclaimeth,_

For thou art the resurrection and the life....

                  _And the customary dismissal is made._

                     _Then the prayer of absolution._

The Lord Jesus Christ our God.... _Vide page 163._

_And we go forth to the grave, bearing the body of him that hath fallen
asleep to the burial. And the priests with all the clerks, preceding the
remains, sing,_

Christ is risen....

_And they bury them with thanksgiving and joy, doing and saying all that
is written at page 157 for the burial of a lay person._

                       _And singing the troparion._

O earth that yawnest, take thou that that out of thee was made.

_End of the order of the burial of them that fall asleep in the days of
the bright week._




[Illustration]




_Chapter XVIII._

THE MORTUARY ORDER OVER A DEPARTED PRIEST.


When one of the secular priests departeth to the Lord, three priests come
and lift him from the bed, and lay him on the floor upon a mat. And since
it behoveth not that he be washed, being naked, by the priests, they
sponge him with pure oil. Then they clothe him in his customary garments,
and after that with all the priestly vestments, and cover his face with
the aër, and lay the holy gospel upon him. Then the priests come vested
in the priestly vestments.

_And the president maketh_, Blessed be our God....

                  _And they that are standing by begin,_

Holy God.... O most holy Trinity.... and Our Father.... For thine is the
kingdom....

           _And straightway they sing these troparia, tone iv._

With the spirits of the righteous.... _Page 138._

                           _The deacon saith,_

Have mercy upon us, O God.... _Vide page 139._

_And straightway the priests take the remains, and carry them into the
porch of the temple, and lay the holy gospel over him, as aforesaid, and
candlesticks crosswise with tapers, and the singer beginneth,_

The undefiled in the way, alleluia.

                              _In tone vi._

_Then_, Blessed are the undefiled.... _Page 141._

_After the first stasis, deacon_, Again and again.... _Page 142._

_After this we begin the second stasis in tone v, in which at the end of
a verse we say,_

Have mercy upon thy servant.

_The choir beginneth_, Thy commandments....

Have mercy upon thy servant.

_And again the same choir_, Thy hands have made me....

_After the iind stasis, deacon_, Again and again.... _Page 142._

_And again they begin the third stasis in tone iii._

Thy name, alleluia.

                   _And again the same choir singeth,_

Look upon me, and have mercy upon me....

_After the iiird stasis, and after the troparia of the undefiled,
deacon_, Again and again.... _Page 142._

                         _Then troparia, tone v._

Our Saviour rest thy servant with the just, and place him in thy courts,
as it is written, as being good, despising his iniquities, both willing
ones and those unwilling, and all those done in knowledge and in
ignorance, O lover of mankind.

                            _Glory. Both now._

Christ God, who from the Virgin, shinest to the world, who hast through
her made manifest the sons of light, have mercy thou on us.

                        _Then graduals, tone vi._

Unto heaven have I lifted up mine eyes, unto thee, O Word; have
compassion upon me, that I may live to thee.

Have mercy upon us who have been set at nought, appointing us, O Word, to
be vessels acceptable unto thee.

                                 _Glory._

To the Holy Ghost belongs every all-saving cause: on whomsoever he,
through worthiness, doth breathe, he quickly taketh him from earthly
things, gives wings, exalteth and appoints his place on high.

                          _Both now, the same._

                       _Then prokimenon, tone vi._

Blessed is the way wherein thou goest to-day, O soul, because a place of
rest hath been prepared for thee.

_Verse._ Return O my soul, unto thy rest, for the Lord hath wrought a
good thing for thee.

_The message of the holy apostle Paul to the Thessalonians, section
cclxx._

Brethren, I would not have you to be ignorant.... _ending_, be ever with
the Lord.[35]

_Priest._ Peace to thee.

_Reader._ And to thy spirit.

_Reader. A psalm of David. Alleluia, tone viii._

Blessed is he whom thou hast chosen and received, O Lord.

_Deacon._ Wisdom, standing, let us hear the holy gospel.

_Priest. The reading of the holy gospel from John, section xvi._

The Lord said unto the Jews that came unto him, Verily, verily, I say....
_ending_, the Father which hath sent me.[36]

_Then the deacon._ Let us pray to the Lord.

_Choir._ Lord, have mercy.

                       _And the priest the prayer._

Master, Lord our God, who only hast immortality, who dwellest in
unapproachable light, who killest and makest alive, who wentest down into
hades and didst arise therefrom; thou didst in wisdom create man, and
didst turn him again to earth, exacting payment of his spiritual debt.
Thee we beseech, Accept the soul of thy servant, and rest him in the
bosom of Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob; and give unto him the crown of
thy righteousness, the portion of the saved, in the glory of thine elect;
that in whatsoever he hath laboured in this world for thy name’s sake, he
may receive a plenteous reward in the habitations of thy saints; through
the grace, and compassions, and love to man of thine only-begotten Son,
our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

                           _Kathisma, tone ii._

To-day I from my kinsfolk sever’d am, and unto thee betake myself, thou
only sinless one: O rest me in the tabernacles of the just with thine
elect.

                        _Then we say psalm xxii._

The Lord tendeth me, and there is nothing lacking to me.

_Alleluia, thrice, repeating alleluia to every verse of the rest of the
psalm._

                  _Then the present troparion, tone ii._

Since to the same abiding-place we all are urg’d, and under the same
stone shall come, and in a little time in self same dust shall be, let
us ask Christ for rest for him removed hence. For such our life is,
brethren, this on earth, a toy: that which is not it abides, and that
that doth abide it perisheth. We are a dream that stayeth not, a breath
that is not held, a flight of passing birds, a ship upon a trackless sea.
Then let us cry to the immortal King, O Lord, vouchsafe to him thine
endless blessedness.

                          _Prokimenon, tone vi._

Blessed is he whom thou hast chosen and received, O Lord.

_Verse._ To thee is due a song, O God, in Sion.

               _The epistle to the Romans, section lxxxix._

Brethren, as by one man sin.... _ending_, Jesus Christ our Lord.[37]

                           _Alleluia, tone vi._

_Verse._ Blessed is he whom thou hast chosen and received, O Lord.

                   _The gospel from John, section xv._

The Lord saith unto the Jews that came unto him, My Father worketh....
_ending_, but is passed from death unto life.[38]

_Then the deacon._ Let us pray to the Lord.

                            _And the priest._

We give thanks unto thee, O Lord our God, for thine alone it is to have
immortal life, and inaccessible glory, and unspeakable love to man, and
an uninheritable kingdom, and there is no respect of persons with thee;
for thou hast appointed unto all men a common limit of life, when life
hath been fulfilled. Therefore we beseech thee, O Lord, Rest thy servant,
and our fellow minister, _name_, who hath fallen asleep in hope of the
resurrection of eternal life, in the bosom of Abraham, and Isaac, and
Jacob. And as on earth thou hast appointed him a minister of thy church,
so also declare him at thy heavenly altar, O Lord; and like as thou hast
adorned him with spiritual honour among men, so accept him uncondemned in
angelic glory. Thou thyself hast glorified his life on earth, and do thou
thyself appoint the outgoing of his life to be the ingoing to thy holy
righteous ones; and number his soul among all them that from ages have
been acceptable unto thee.

For thou art the resurrection and the life, and the repose of thy
servant, _name_, who hath fallen asleep, O Christ our God, and to thee we
ascribe glory, with thine unbeginning Father, and with thy most holy, and
good, and life-creating Spirit, now and ever, and to ages of ages. Amen.

                              _Antiphon ii._

Were not the Lord with us, we none could have withstood the foe’s attack;
for they that overcome are thence lift up.

As a small bird be not my soul caught in their teeth, O Word: woe unto
me! how from the foe shall I be freed, who am a lover of sin.

                                 _Glory._

Through the Holy Ghost divinity comes to all, goodwill and understanding,
peace and blessing; for he is like-effective with the Father and the Word.

                          _Both now, the same._

The earth is the Lord’s, and the fulness thereof.[39]

_Alleluia, thrice, repeating alleluia to every verse of the rest of the
psalm. Glory, alleluia. Both now, alleluia._

                          _Troparion, tone ii._

In faith, and hope, and love, and meekness, and in chastity, and in
the priestly dignity thou piously hast liv’d, thou aye remember’d one.
Therefore the eternal God, whom thou hast served, in a bright and
pleasant place, where rest the just, thy soul hath plac’d; and, at the
judgment-seat of Christ, thou shalt forgiveness gain, and mercy great.

                           _Kathisma, tone v._

Thou knowest, O our God, that we were born in sin. Therefore we thee
beseech, Rest him who is remov’d from us, o’erlooking, as the good one,
the iniquities, which he, as mortal man, hath done in life, through the
God-bearing one’s entreaties, thou sole lover of mankind.

                          _Prokimenon, tone vi._

Blessed is he whom thou hast chosen and received, O Lord.

_Verse._ His remembrance is to generation and generation.

            _The epistle to the Corinthians, section clviii._

Brethren, I declare unto you.... _ending_, so ye believed.[40]

_Alleluia._ Blessed is he whom thou hast chosen and received, O Lord.

                   _The gospel from John, section xxi._

The Lord spake unto the Jews that came unto him, I am the bread....
_ending_, at the last day.[41]

_Then the deacon._ Let us pray to the Lord.

                      _And the priest this prayer._

O Lord of hosts, who art the joy of the afflicted, the consolation of
mourners, and the aid of all them that are faint-hearted; do thou in
thy tenderness console them that are constrained with grief for him that
hath fallen asleep, and heal every distress that lieth in their hearts,
and rest thy servant, _name_, who hath fallen asleep in hope of the
resurrection of eternal life, in the bosom of Abraham.

For thou art the resurrection, the life, and the repose of thy servant,
_name_, O Christ our God, and to thee we ascribe glory, with thine
unbeginning Father, and with thy most holy, and good, and life-creating
Spirit, now and ever, and to ages of ages. Amen.

                             _Antiphon iii._

They that trust in the Lord are terrible to enemies, and wonderful to
all; for they look on high.

Let not the inheritance of the righteous, having thee, O Saviour, as a
helper, stretch forth their hands unto transgression.

                                 _Glory._

Of the Holy Ghost is the might in all things: him the hosts above
worship, and everything that hath breath below.

                          _Both now, the same._

How amiable are thy tabernacles, O Lord of hosts....[42]

_Alleluia, thrice, repeating also in order the rest of the Psalm._

                        _Then troparion, tone vi._

O my beloved brethren, do ye forget me not, when ye sing unto the Lord;
but remember ye the brotherhood, and beseech ye God that the Lord may
rest me with the just.

                          _Troparion, tone vi._

On me death suddenly hath come, and parted me to day from that which
was mine own; but me, translating, do thou rest, O Christ, in places of
refreshment.

Have mercy upon us, O Lord, have mercy upon us; for, destitute of all
defence, we sinners offer unto thee, as Master, this prayer, Have mercy
upon us.

                                 _Glory._

O Lord, have mercy upon us; for we have put our trust in thee. Be not
exceedingly wroth against us, neither remember our transgressions; but,
as being loving-kind, look now upon us, and deliver us from our enemies;
for thou art our God, and we are thy people, we are all the work of thy
hand, and we call upon thy name.

                         _Both now. Theotokion._

Open unto us the gates of loving-kindness, O blessed God-bearing one,
that we perish not who put our trust in thee, but through thee may we be
delivered from calamities; for thou art the salvation of the christian
race.

                          _Prokimenon, tone vi._

His soul shall dwell in good things.

_Verse._ Unto thee, O Lord, have I cried....

              _The epistle to the Corinthians, section clx._

Brethren, Christ is risen ... _ending_, God may be all in all.[43]
_Alleluia._

Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord.

_Verse._ His seed shall be mighty upon earth.

                  _The gospel from John, section xxii._

The Lord spake unto the Jews that came unto him, This is the will....
_ending_, at the last day.[44]

                    _Then the beatitudes in tone ii._

In thy kingdom remember us, O Lord, when thou comest in thy kingdom.

Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted.

Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth.

Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they
shall be filled.

Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.

For tasting the tree’s fruit of old Adam from paradise was driven; but
for thee owning to be God, when on the cross he hung, the thief was
plac’d in paradise. And, saved by thy passion, Lord, we imitate the
thief, crying in faith, Remember us, when in thy kingdom thou shalt come.

Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.

My maker, taking clay from earth, by will divine my body form’d, but by a
holy ordinance he plac’d a soul therein, by breathing breath that beareth
life. And when to sin’s corruption I in evil wise was bound, me thou
recalledst, lover of mankind, by tenderness extreme. But rest, O God,
among thy Saints, him whom thou hast receiv’d.

Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called the children of God.

When soul and body parted are, fearful and dread the mystery is to
all: then wailing goeth forth the soul, and hid the body is, consign’d
to earth. Therefore let us, knowing the final going hence, before the
Saviour come with tears, and cry, When in thy kingdom thou shalt come, do
thou remember us.

Blessed are they that are persecuted for righteousness’ sake, for theirs
is the kingdom of heaven.

Why bitterly do ye lament, O men, for me? and why in vain do ye a
murmuring make? he that is gone to all exclaims; for unto all a rest is
death. Then let us hear the voice of Job who saith, Death is the rest of
man. But rest, O God, among thy Saints him whom thou hast receiv’d.

Blessed are ye when they shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall
say all manner of evil against you falsely for my name’s sake.

The all-wise Paul hath clearly fore-announc’d the change, instructing all
that uncorrupt the dead shall rise, and we be chang’d by God’s command.
Then shall that trumpet sound in fearful wise, and they that have from
ages slept shall rise from sleep. But rest, O God, among thy Saints him
whom thou hast receiv’d.

Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in heaven.

He that is gone and in the grave lies dead, being reconcil’d, to all
exclaims, Come unto me, ye sons of earth, see ye the body’s beauty
render’d dark. Then, brethren, knowing his departure hence, let us before
the Saviour come, and cry with tears, Rest thou, O God, among thy Saints
him whom thou hast receiv’d.

                      _Glory. Both now. Theotokion._

Thou, Queen, didst seedlessly within thy womb in supernatural wise
conceive the God who ere the ages was, and bring him forth in flesh
unchangedly and unconfusedly, himself being God and man. Therefore we
ever owning thee God-bearing one in faith exclaim to God brought forth
from thee, Remember in thy kingdom also us.

                          _Prokimenon, tone vi._

Blessed is he whom thou hast chosen and received, O Lord.

_Verse._ His soul shall dwell in good things.

               _The epistle to the Romans, section cxiii._

Brethren, he that regardeth the day.... _ending_, the dead and living.[45]

                           _Alleluia, tone vi._

Blessed is he whom thou hast chosen and received, O Lord.

_Verse._ His soul shall dwell in good things.

                  _The gospel from John, section xxiii._

The Lord spake unto the Jews that came unto him, I am the bread of
life.... _ending_, at the last day.[46]

                 _Then psalm l. And the canon, tone vi._

                             _Ode i. Irmos._

Him that beneath the surges of the sea....

_Refrain._ Rest, O Lord, thy sleeping servant’s soul.

To thee, O benefactor, Christ, and Lord of all, we cast us down with
fervent tears, and wailing cry this funeral song, Thy faithful servant
rest, thou that art loving-kind.

Him that is dead in hope of resurrection grant the holy standing, Word,
at thy right hand with thine elect, prolongedly with voice of praise we
pray, O lover of mankind.

Thy chosen servant from the earth remov’d, O lover of mankind, count
worthy brightly to rejoice within thy kingdom heavenly and rever’d; and
overlook, as loving-kind, his soul’s iniquities.

                                 _Glory._

Alas! life’s glory grew as grass, and straightway was dried up. Where
in the grave is honour? and where form or beauty there? Then spare thy
servant, Lord, as being loving-kind.

                         _Both now. Theotokion._

With love, as it behoves, we thee all praise, O Mary, Mother of God,
Virgin most pure; for thou hast ever sleepless eyes—thy prayers—to save
us now from sins, and from the doom of death.

                            _Ode iii. Irmos._

There is none holy like to thee, O Lord my God....

There is no man on earth that hath not sinn’d, O Word. Therefore accept
a prayer from us, the lowly ones: and, Saviour, pardon and forgive thy
servant all iniquities.

And who, O lover of mankind, as thou, Lord merciful, forgivest sins of
quick and dead with great authority? Therefore thy servant do thou save
by this.

                                 _Glory._

Of calling from on high, O Saviour, him heritor declare, even him gone
hence in faith, accepting his last tearful prayer, thou only sinless one.

                         _Both now. Theotokion._

O thou that art our Queen, all holy Virgin, cease not beseeching God,
whom thou didst bear, to count him worthy of his kingdom, even him who
hence in faith hath gone.

                           _Kathisma, tone vi._

Verily everything is vain, and life a shadow is, a dream; for vainly
every earth-born one disquieteth himself, as saith the scripture. When
we have gain’d the world, then dwell we in the grave, where kings and
beggars are as one. Therefore, O Christ, thy servant rest in tract of
living ones, and in the dwellings of the just.

                             _Ode iv. Irmos._

Thy divine exhaustion on the cross....

Since importable is the terrible threatening of that day, let us
unceasingly beseech of Christ forgiveness of all sins for him that hath
in faith and hope of resurrection hither gone.

Since, through penitence, he, thy servant, unto thee a lamp enkindled
brightly ere his death, O Master, Saviour loving-kind, vouchsafe to him
in brightly wise thy bridal-room.

                                 _Glory._

When all things hid thou dost reveal, and prove our sins, O Christ, him
whom thou hast receiv’d do thou then spare, remembering his confession,
Lord.

                         _Both now. Theotokion._

Holy God-bearing one, forget not all that cry to thee with ceaseless
wail; and find him rest, thou blessed one, even him, thy faithful
servant, who is gone from us.

                             _Ode v. Irmos._

Of thy divine epiphany, O Christ....

In the elect ones’ choir, and in the joy of paradise, O thou
compassionate one, give rest to him whom thou from us in faith removed
hast; for thou, our Saviour, hast divine repentance laid on all men who
have sinn’d; and him, as Master, of thy kingdom worthy count.

According to thy might as God, thou art, in lordly wise, unto thy
creature merciful, whom thou subjected hast to human law, O Lord, sole
lover of mankind. Therefore remit, forgive the sins of him gone hence in
faith, and him, O Saviour, of thy kingdom worthy count.

                                 _Glory._

None there escape the fearful sentence of thy judgment-seat: kings,
mighty ones with servants all together stand, and them, the people who
have sinn’d, the judge’s fearful voice bids to gehenna’s doom; but save
from this thy servant, Christ.

                         _Both now. Theotokion._

In supernatural wise from thee was born, according unto human nature, him
that Redeemer is; and him, O thou unwedded Virgin, ceaselessly beseech to
free from torment all, and from the fierce and fearful hades’ pains; and
save him who is now in faith remov’d from us.

                             _Ode vi. Irmos._

The lowest depth....

Death and the grave and judgment us await, impressing all our works; and
out of these thy servant save, O lover of mankind, even him who thou
removed hast.

Open, my Saviour, I beseech thee, unto him gone hence thy mercy’s door,
that he, O Christ, in glory may in chorus sing, partaking of the gladness
of thy mightiness.

                                 _Glory._

Deliver, Saviour, from iniquities thy servant for thy mercy’s sake, him
whom thou now removed hast in faith; for none is justified by human
works, O lover of mankind.

                         _Both now. Theotokion._

The slayer of death and looser of the curse in flesh thou broughtest
forth, God-bearing one, and all that die in faith he saves, as being
good and lover of mankind.

                      _Then the customary ectenia._

Again and again.... _Page 142._

_And the prayer_, O God of spirits.... _Page 139._

                         _Condakion, tone viii._

Rest with the Saints, O Christ, thy servant’s soul, where is no pain, nor
grief, nor sighing, but life that endeth not.

                                 _Icos._

Thyself alone immortal art, who madest and didst fashion man, for out of
earth we mortals fashion’d were, and unto that same earth shall go, as
thou who madest me hast given command, and sayest unto me, Earth thou
art, and unto earth shalt thou return. And thither all we mortals go,
making the funeral wail, even the song, the _Alleluia_.

Hearken in thoughtful wise, I pray; for I with pain these words announce;
yea, for your sake I make the wail: it may for profit be to some. But
when ye have to sing these words, remember me who once was known;
for ofttimes we together went, and in God’s house together sang the
_Alleluia_.

Arise ye then, and gather ye together all, and, sitting down, hear ye a
word, Brethren, the judgment-seat is dread, where we have every one to
stand. There none is slave, and none is free; there none is little, none
is great; but all in nakedness shall stand: for this cause it is well to
sing ofttimes the psalm, the _Alleluia_.

Bewail we all with tears as we behold the relics lie, and all approaching
them to kiss let us in equal wise exclaim, Lo, thou hast left them who
thee lov’d: wilt thou not speak with us again? Why dost thou speak not,
friend, as thou wast wont to speak to us? But so thou silent art, even to
say with us the _Alleluia_.

What, brethren, are the dying’s bitter words, which, when they go, they
say? I from the brethren parted am, I quit and leave you all, O friends.
Then where I go I do not know, and how I shall be there know not: God
only knows, who calleth me. But make ye my memorial with the song, the
_Alleluia_.

Then where now go the souls? then how now fare they there? I long to
learn the mystery; but none sufficient is to tell. Do they remember their
own things, as we remember them? or have they us forgotten who are left,
who them lament and make the song, the _Alleluia_.

Accompany the dead, O friends, and to the grave with heed hie ye,
and muse ye there in thoughtful wise, and your own feet prepare: all
youthfulness is cast therein, all vigour fadeth there: there dust and
ashes are, and worms: there all is silence, and none saying _Alleluia_.

Lo, now we see him lying, but to us no presence is of him: behold,
the tongue now silent is, and, lo, already cease the lips. Farewell, O
friends, O children; be ye saved, O ye brethren, O acquaintance, be ye
sav’d; for I depart my way. But make ye my memorial with the song, the
_Alleluia_.

Not one of those who there hath gone doth live again to tell to us how
they, our brethren once and kinsfolk, fare who there have come before the
Lord. Therefore, we oft, yea, ever say, Do they each other there behold?
do they a brother see? do they together say the psalm, the _Alleluia_?

We go the everlasting way in mien as them that are condemn’d, with faces
all cast down. Then where is beauty? where is wealth? then where the
glory of this life? Nothing of these shall help us there, even to say
ofttimes the psalm, the _Alleluia_.

Why in untimely wise disquietest thou thyself, O man? one hour, and all
is gone; for there in hades no repentance is, nor any further pardon
there: the never-dying worm is there, all there is dark and gloomy land,
where I must come to be condemn’d. For I have not ofttimes made speed to
say the psalm, the _Alleluia_.

Nothing so soon forgotten is by man as man when he is gone; for, if we
do remember for a time, we straightway death forget, when absent is the
dead. And parents even every child forget, that, of the womb begot, they
nourish’d have, and have with tears accompanied with the song, the
_Alleluia_.

I remind you, O my brethren, and my children, and my friends, that ye
forget me not when ye beseech the Lord. I pray, I ask, I make entreaty
that ye keep these words in memory, and bewail me day and night. I
speak to you as Job did to his friends, O sit ye down to say again the
_Alleluia_.

Forsaking all things we depart, and naked and abhorrent we become; for
comeliness doth fade away as grass, but only do we men delude ourselves.
Thou naked, wretched one, wast born, and altogether naked there shalt
stand! Then be not prodigal in life, O man; but only always sigh with
wailing, _Alleluia_.

If thou, O man, art merciful to man, he there shall mercy have to show to
thee; and if to any orphan hast been kind, he there shall thee deliver
out of need; if thou in life the naked clothed hast, he there shall
clothing have to put on thee, and sing the psalm, the _Alleluia_.

The way is evil whereby I depart, and therein so I never went; that
country also is unknown, where me none recognize at all. ’Tis fearful
them to see who dreadfully are led, and him who me hath call’d, who
ruleth life and death, and there us biddeth when he willeth. _Alleluia._

If from some country we depart, we of some guides have need. What shall
we do, and whither go, that country in, where we are quite unknown? To
thee will then be needful many guides, and many prayers to go with thee
to save thy wretched soul, ere it attain to Christ, and say to him, the
_Alleluia_.

They that to lusts material subject are, in nowise have forgiveness
there: there terrible accusers are, and there too opened are the books.
Then where, O man, wilt thou glance round? or who will there then thee
assist? save thou in life hast wrought some good, or done some kindness
to the poor, singing the _Alleluia_.

Both youth and bodily beauty fade away in time of death, and then in
painful wise is parch’d the tongue, and, dried up, is scorch’d the
throat, then quenched is the beauty of the eyes, all chang’d the beauty
of the face, the beauty of the neck is spoil’d, and what remaineth silent
is to say ofttimes the _Alleluia_.

Keep silence then, keep silence: O ye survivors, be ye still before him
lying there, and contemplate the mystery great; for fearful is the hour.
Hush, that the soul may go in peace; for it endureth anguish great, and
in much fear beseecheth God with _Alleluia_.

I have seen an infant dying, and for my life have wept; for it was
altogether scar’d, and, when its hour came, trembling cried, O father,
help me; mother, save me! and none sufficient was to help it then: they
only griev’d beholding, and in the grave bewail’d it. _Alleluia._

How many on a sudden have been taken from their bridal to the grave,
betroth’d been with an everlasting troth, have costless made the dirge,
and from the chamber have not risen; but together there was marriage and
the grave, together troth and parting, together laughter and the wail,
yea, and the psalm, the _Alleluia_.

We are enflam’d when only hearing that everlasting light is there, there
our life’s fount, and there eternal joy: the paradise is there where
every soul rejoiceth with the just. We all in Christ shall gather’d be,
that so to God we all may cry the _Alleluia_.

All-holy Virgin, thou unwedded one, who didst bring forth th’
approachless light, I pray, entreaty make, and beg, Cease not to pray the
Lord concerning him, thy sleeping servant, thou most pure, that in the
day of judgment he may find forgiveness there; for thou, as Queen all
pure, to pray thy Son hast always boldness. _Alleluia_.

                       _Then again the condakion._

Rest with the Saints, O Christ.... _Page 188._

                            _Ode vii. Irmos._

Narrateless wonder....

As being pitiful, O Christ, deliver him, thy servant, whom thou in faith
received hast, from fearful doom, and from gehenna’s fire, and to thy
servant grant to sing to thee, Blessed art thou, redeemer, God.

Within the land of gentle ones, and in delights of paradise, in glory’s
wondrous dwelling-place, thy servant faithfully asleep esteeming worthy,
God, do thou grant him to sing to thee, Blessed art thou, redeemer, God.

                                 _Glory._

Great is the doom and undescribable the need, O brethren, in gehenna; for
the souls of sinners there are burned with their bodies, and in anguish
weep, unable to exclaim, Blessed art thou, redeemer, God.

                               _Both now._

Them that undoubtingly thee praise, O Mother of God, thou altogether
undefil’d God-bearing one, when living by thy prayers for ever guard, and
when departed free from bitter torment, that they with thee to Christ may
say, Blessed art thou, redeemer, God.

                            _Ode viii. Irmos._

Fearingly quake, O heaven....

O what dread hour awaiteth sinners, brethren! O what terror then!
gehenna’s fire consumes, and shall eternally torment. Therefore, O
Christ, compassionate Lord, deliver him departed now from us from fearful
threatening, and snatch him from gehenna’s pains eternally.

Oh, of the just the joy which they receive when comes the judge! for them
the bridal-chamber is prepar’d, and paradise, and all Christ’s kingdom;
and there thy servant, Christ, make manifest rejoicing with the Saints
eternally.

                                 _Glory._

Who shall endure the fearful menace of thy presence, Christ? the heavens
thereat roll’d up shall be as is a scroll in fearful wise, the stars
shall fall, and all creation shake with fear, and changed be the light;
but then, O Word, spare him whom thou removed hast from us.

                         _Both now. Theotokion._

Him whom thou gavest flesh in supernatural wise, O pure, even the Son, he
is the judge of living and of dead, and judgeth all the earth, and saves
from torment whom he wills, and them especially who in types adore him
lovingly, and thee, God-bearing one, extol eternally.

                             _Ode ix. Irmos._

Weep not for me, O mother....

O weep ye not, all ye who die in faith; for Christ for us bore flesh, the
cross, and sepulture, and made all them immortal sons that sing to him, O
into judgment with thy servant enter not.

Let us, ye faithful, from the heart pray Christ to stablish in the
dwellings of the saints the brother who in faith and hope of resurrection
sleeps; for there is judgment stern and trial dread, and none can help
himself without good works, and common prayer of faithful ones; and let
us cry, Lord, into judgment with thy servant enter not.

                                 _Glory._

In, Blessed One, thy glory that becomes not old, and in delights of
paradise, place him who now is gone from us, and in the right-belief and
penitence betaketh him to thee in faith; and of thy kingdom him a chosen
partner make.

                         _Both now. Theotokion._

God-bearing Virgin, we reverently, we, faithful ones, extol thee who art
mother of life in supernatural wise; for we, aforetime dead, being made
immortal, life have found; and, lo, to thee the song we end.

_Deacon._ Again and again.... _Page 142._

_And the prayer_, O God of spirits.... _Page 139._

                            _Exapostilarion._

Now am I at rest, and much forgiveness have receiv’d; for I have passed
from corruption, and am translated unto life: glory to thee, O Lord.

                        _And the people the same._

_Verse i._ Man is as grass, his day is as a flower of the field.

_Verse ii._ For his spirit goeth through in him, and he shall not be.

_Verse iii._ And the mercy of the Lord shall endure to ages.

                 _And to each verse the exapostilarion._

                         _Then, Glory. Both now._

Now have I chosen the maiden Mother of God, for Christ, redeemer of all,
was born of her: glory to thee, O Lord.

_And straightway_, Praise the Lord from the heavens....[47]

                        _Then stichera, tone vi._

_Like_, Having despair’d....

Thy godly minister is gone to thee, now deified in the translation by thy
quickening mystery, Christ: take as a bird his soul into thy hand, and
range him in thy courts and in the angelic choirs, and rest him whom thou
hast received by thy command, O Lord, for thy great mercy’s sake.

Strange is the mystery of death; for unacceptably it comes to all, nature
by force is spoil’d; it taketh elders, abbots, scribes, teachers who
vainly strive, bishops, and pastors too. Then let us cry with tears, Him,
whom thou hast receiv’d, O Lord, by thy command, O rest, for thy great
mercy’s sake.

He that in piety hath liv’d, and was thy decorated priest, O Christ, the
celebrant and offerer of thy mysteries divine, is gone, by thy divine
command, from life’s alarms to thee; and him, accepting as a priest, O
Saviour, save, and with the righteous rest, even him whom thou received
hast, for thy great mercy’s sake.

                      _Glory. Both now. Theotokion._

God-bearing Virgin, we have understood the God made flesh from thee, whom
do thou pray to save our souls.

_Then they say_, Glory to God in the highest....

_And after the_ Vouchsafe, O Lord....

                _the following stichera idiomela are said,
                          of Damascene, tone i._

What sweet of life abideth unaccompanied with grief? what glory stayeth
upon earth unchang’d? All is the feeblest shade, all the most cheating
dream: one moment, and death taketh all these things. But in thy face’s
light, O Christ, and in the sweetness of thy beauty, grant rest to him
whom thou hast call’d, as lover of mankind.

_Verse._ The Lord tendeth me, and there is nothing lacking to me.

By deed, my Saviour, thou hast shewn that thou the resurrection art of
all, who didst, O Word, by word raise Lazarus from the dead. Then were
the fetters burst, and shatter’d hades’ gates; then human death declared
was a sleep. Thou, therefore, who didst come thy creature, not to judge,
but save, rest him whom thou received hast, as lover of mankind.

                      _Glory. Both now. Theotokion._

Thou art made manifest, O Bringer-forth of God, a fervent advocate for
all, for all a shelter, and a might of God for them that hie to thee, an
aid for them that are in need, a quick deliverance for the bound. For
thee against barbarians Christ hath placed as a fence, and barrier, and
assailless wall; and for the weak a strength unovercome; and for our
souls the arbitress of peace.

                           _Stichera, tone ii._

Woe unto me, what agony hath the soul when it is from the body torn!
alas, then how it weeps, and none is merciful to it! To Angels lifting
eyes, without effect it prays; to men extending hands, it findeth none to
help. Therefore, my brethren lov’d, musing on our brief life, let us for
the departed ask for rest from Christ, and for great mercy for our souls.

_Verse._ When I was in affliction I cried unto the Lord, and he heard me.

Come, let us all a wonder passing thought behold: he who but yesterday
abode with us now lieth dead. Come, let us know that soon in funeral
swathes we also at an end shall be; and they anointed with the fragrant
myrrh shall lie of odour ill. How is it they adorn’d with gold lie
unadorn’d and void of form? Therefore, my brethren well belov’d, musing
on our brief life, let us of Christ entreat for rest for him who hence
hath gone, and for great mercy for our souls.

_Verse._ O Lord, deliver my soul from unrighteous lips.

Farewell, vain life; farewell, all friends, acquaintances, and children
too; for in a way I go where never have I trod. But come, remembering my
love for you, follow ye me, and give ye to the grave this clay of mine,
and pray ye Christ with tears, who hath to judge my humble soul, that he
may snatch me from the quenchless fire.

                      _Glory. Both now. Theotokion._

O gate impassable, in mystery seal’d, God-bearing Virgin bless’d; accept
our prayers, and offer them thy Son and God, that he, through thee, may
save our souls.

                      _Stichera idiomela, tone iii._

Lo, brethren mine belov’d, amid you all I silent lie, bereft of speech;
the mouth is listless, still the tongue, impeded are the lips, the hands
are tied, the feet together bound, the countenance is chang’d, the eyes
are dimm’d and see not them that wail, the hearing takes not in the cry
of them that mourn, the nose the fragrant incense smelleth not; but
in nowise true love becometh dead. Therefore I you beseech, all mine
acquaintances and friends, Remember me before the Lord, that I in day of
doom may mercy find before that fearful judgment-seat.

_Verse._ I have lifted up mine eyes to the hills, whence cometh my help.

All human things are vanity which last not after death: riches abide not,
nor doth glory stay; for when death cometh these all disappear. Then let
us cry to the immortal Christ, O rest him who is gone away from us where
is the dwelling-place of all that joy.

_Verse._ The Lord shall keep thy goings-out and thy comings-in from
henceforth and for evermore.

O men, why do we vainly we ourselves disquiet? the course we run is quick
and hard: life is as smoke: soon vapour, dust, and ashes we shall be; and
as a flower shall fade. Therefore let us to the immortal Christ exclaim,
Rest him remov’d from us where is the dwelling-place of all that joy.

                      _Glory. Both now. Theotokion._

God-bearing Virgin, we, we tempest-tost upon life’s sea, thee as
salvation’s haven have. Therefore pray God, who seedlessly from thee
incarnate was, and man became unspeakably, to save our souls.

                           _Stichera, tone iv._

Where is the predilection of the world? where their imaginings who
fade? where is the silver and the gold? where servants’ multitude and
noise? All dust, all ashes, all a shade. But, come ye, let us say to
the immortal King, O Lord, him, who hath been remov’d from us, of thine
eternal blessings worthy count, him resting in thine ageless happiness.

_Verse._ I was glad when they said unto me, Let us go into the house of
the Lord.

Death as a robber came, like as a thief he came, and laid me low; he
came, and me declar’d as one existing not; he came, and, being earth,
I lie as being not. We verily are a dream, O men, a phantom verily.
But, come ye, let us cry to the immortal King, O Lord, vouchsafe thine
everlasting blessings unto him remov’d from us, him resting in the life
that grows not old.

                      _Glory. Both now. Theotokion._

O only pure and spotless Virgin, who without seed didst bring forth God,
pray that our souls be sav’d.

                           _Stichera, tone v._

I remember’d what the prophet said, I am earth and I am dust; and again
I meditated in the graves, and saw the naked bones, and said, Who now is
king, or, warrior, who; or, who is rich, or, who is poor; or, who the
just, or, he that sinn’d? But, with the just, thy servant rest, O Lord.

_Verse._ Our feet have stood in thy courts, O Jerusalem.

Thou, Christ, hast said that he in thee believing shall not death behold:
but, as I out of light in light am light, so shall ye also in my glory
be enlightened in me; for I, that am true God, have come to save them
that revere me in true right-belief, me, one Lord God, in dual nature of
deity and flesh, but one in essence. Therefore, thy faithful servant, who
thus confesseth thee, rest in thy countenance’s light among the Saints,
as lover of mankind.

                      _Glory. Both now. Theotokion._

We thee beseech, as Mother of God, O blessed one, Pray thou for us, that
we be sav’d.

                           _Stichera, tone vi._

To me thy life-effecting bidding was substance and origin; for, willing
me to form a living one from nature that unseen is and is seen, my body
thou didst make of earth, and, by thy breathing life-creating and divine,
me gavest soul. Therefore, O Christ, thy servant rest in tract of them
that living are, and in the dwellings of the just.

_Verse._ Unto thee have I lifted up mine eyes, O thou that dwellest in
heaven.

That which thy hands did frame thou with thine image honour’d hast,
O Word; for, in material form inscribing livingly a mental essence’s
similitude, of this me also thou hast made participant, placing me on the
earth to be, of mine own power, creation’s lord. Therefore, thy servant,
Saviour, rest in tract of them that living are, and in the dwellings of
the just.

                      _Glory. Both now. Theotokion._

God-bearing Virgin, we have understood the God made flesh from thee,
whom do thou pray to save our souls.

                          _Stichera, tone vii._

After thine image and resemblance in the beginning making man, in
paradise thou him didst place to be of thy creation lord; but, by the
devil’s enviousness beguil’d, he ate the fruit, transgressing thy
commands. Therefore again to earth, whence he was taken, thou hast doom’d
him to return, O Lord, and beg for rest.

_Verse._ How amiable are thy tabernacles, O Lord of hosts.

Death looseth every grief befalling Adam’s nature; for corrupt we have
become, partaking of the food. Then let us learn, form’d out of earth,
we dust and ashes shall become, like as we were before. Therefore let
us with wailing voice our Maker pray pardon and mercy to bestow on him
removed hence.

                      _Glory. Both now. Theotokion._

Thee, O God-bearing one, we faithful have as an unbroken wall and trust.
Therefore, cease not, O Queen, to pray for them thy servants that in
faith have slept, that in the judgment there may pardon be for them, when
he thy Son and God shall sit; for thou dost nature know, that it with
every sin is now commix’d: so may we bless thee all.

                          _Stichera, tone viii._

I weep and I lament when I reflect on death, and see the comeliness,
according to God’s image, that was shap’d for us lying in the graves
disfigur’d, and bereft of glory and of form. O wonder! what is this
mystery concerning us? how to corruption have we been assign’d? how unto
death conjoin’d? Verily by God’s command, as it is written, who giveth
the departed rest.

Bearing an image incorrupt, and having an immortal soul received by
breath divine, and so become compound, as it is written, why do we fade
away? and why did we God’s bidding overstep? O wonder! why did we leave
the food of life, and eat the fruit that bringeth bitter death? why,
by guile, have we been robb’d of life divine? As for the rest, let us
exclaim to Christ, Him whom thou hast removed hence place in thy courts.

                      _Glory. Both now. Theotokion._

God-bearing Virgin, thy protection is a spiritual healing place; for
thereunto betaking us, we are set free from ailments of the soul.

                     _Stichera, tone viii. Idiomela._

To them that prodigally live unmeasur’d torment is, gnashing of teeth,
and wailing unconsol’d, gloom unillum’d, and darkness most profound,
the never dying worm, and unavailing tears, and, without mercy, doom.
Therefore let us, before the end, lift up our voice, and say, O Master
Christ, him who thou chosen hast give rest with thine elect.

                                _Similar._

The trumpet shall give sound, and, as from sleep, the dead shall rise,
desiring to obtain the heavenly life, they who have put their trust in
thee, the Maker and the Lord. Then, O condemn thy servant not; for thou,
immortal one, for our sake mortal didst become. Therefore let us, before
the end, lift up our voice, and say, O Master Christ, him whom thou
chosen hast, give rest with thine elect.

Behold, the elements, the heaven and earth shall be transform’d, and all
creation shall with incorruption clothed be. Corruption shall be done
away, and darkness at thine advent fly; for thou with glory art to come
again, as it is written, to render unto each as he hath done. O Master
Christ, him whom thou chosen hast, give rest with thine elect.

                            _Glory, tone vi._

O come ye all and see a strange and fearful sight made manifest to
all, the image now beheld, and vex yourselves no more with transient
things. To-day divided from the body is a soul, and is translated to
th’ eternal world; for in a way it goeth wherein never yet it went, and
to the Judge who no respect of persons hath, where stand the Angels’
hosts. My brethren, fearful is that judgment-seat, where naked all of us
shall stand, and some be crown’d and some be sham’d. Then let us to th’
immortal King exclaim, When thou shalt try the secrets of mankind, O
spare thy servant whom thou hast receiv’d, Lord, Lover of mankind.

                         _Both now. Theotokion._

Through her entreaties who to thee gave birth, O Christ, and those of thy
Forerunner, and of apostles, prophets, hierarchs, venerables, and just,
and of all Saints, unto thy sleeping servant give thou rest.

_Then_, It is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord.... _The whole._
Trisagion. _After_ Our Father....

Our Saviour, rest thy servant with the just, and place him in thy
courts, as it is written, as being good despising his iniquities, both
willing ones and those unwilling, and all those done in knowledge and in
ignorance, O lover of mankind.

In thy resting-place, O Lord, where all thy Saints repose, O rest thy
servant’s soul; for thou alone art lover of mankind.

O holy Mother of describeless Light, revering thee with angels’ songs, we
magnify thee piously.

                           _The deacon saith,_

Have mercy upon us, O God, according to thy great mercy, we pray thee,
hear and have mercy. _Vide page 139._

_After the exclamation of the prayer the kiss is given, while the choir
singeth the stichera, tone ii._

Come, brethren, let us give the last kiss....

_And the rest, as hath previously been written in the order for laymen._

_Then, Glory, tone vi._ Me, lying voiceless....

                       _Both now. The theotokion._

_And giving forth to the grave the priests sing the irmi of the great
canon, that is to say,_

A help and protection.... _And the rest._

_Trisagion._ _After_ Our Father.... In thy resting-place, O Lord.... O
only pure and spotless Virgin....

_Then_, Have mercy upon us, O God.... _and the rest as customarily_. O
God of spirits....

                      _And the remains are buried._

                    _And the full dismissal is made._




[Illustration]




_Chapter XIX._

THE OFFICE OF THE BURIAL OF A BABE.


_After the priest hath given the blessing, the singers sing,_

Whoso dwelleth under the defence of the Most High....[48]

_And after this_, Alleluia, _in tone viii_.

_Verse._ Blessed is he whom thou hast chosen....

_Verse._ And his remembrance is to generation and generation.

_Trisagion._ _And after_ Our Father.... For thine is the kingdom.

_Then_, Thou who man-lovingly in depth of wisdom....

                                 _Glory._

Our Maker, and our Author, and our God.

                               _Both now._

We have thee as a fortress and a haven....

                             _Then psalm l._

_And after this the requiem canon over a departed babe is begun._

                           _Ode i. Tone viii._

Crossing the sea as on dry land....

_Refrain._ Rest thou the babe, O Lord.

O Word of God, who in the flesh didst poor become, and, without change,
wast pleas’d a babe to be; we pray thee place in Abraham’s bosom the babe
thou hast receiv’d.

Thou wast beheld a babe who ere all ages art, and, as the blessed one,
thy kingdom promis’d hast to babes: O number thou therein the present
babe.

                                 _Glory._

The undefiled babe, O Saviour Christ, whom thou received hast ere
earthly pleasures’ trial, vouchsafe eternal blessedness, as lover of
mankind.

                               _Both now._

Thou who unspeakably didst bear him who the Father’s Wisdom is and Word;
heal thou my soul’s sore wound, and my heart’s pain appease.

                            _Ode iii. Irmos._

O Lord, creator of the vault of heaven and builder of the church; thou
me hast stablish’d in thy love, thou ending of desire, the faithful’s
confirmation, sole lover of mankind.

_Refrain._ Rest thou the babe, O Lord.

O thou most perfect Word, who didst appear a perfect babe, thou hast
removed to thyself a babe imperfect in its growth, whom do thou rest with
all the just who have been welcome unto thee, sole lover of mankind.

Him taken hence, not tasting of the pleasures of the world, of
supermundane blessings make participant we pray, O thou Compassionate
One, even the uncorrupted babe, whom thou hast chang’d by thy divine
command.

                                 _Glory._

Of heavenly dwellings, and of shining lot, and of the sacred choir of
Saints, O Lord, make the pure babe participant, even him, whom, Saviour,
as thou wast well-pleas’d, thou hast remov’d.

                               _Both now._

Bereft of all, to thy sole shelter, most pure Queen, I fly, O aid thou
me; for I unto much sinful riches cleave, but with a poverty of virtues
am altogether fill’d.

_Then the irmos. And after the irmos the priest saith this ectenia._

Again and again in peace let us pray to the Lord.

_Choir._ Lord, have mercy.

Furthermore let us pray for the repose of the happy babe, _name_, and
that to him may be vouchsafed, according to thine undeceiving promise,
thy heavenly kingdom.

_Choir._ Lord, have mercy, _thrice_.

That the Lord our God may place his soul where all the just repose.

_Choir._ Lord, have mercy, _thrice_.

The mercy of God, the kingdom of heaven, and repose among the Saints, for
him and for ourselves let us ask of Christ, our immortal King and God.

_Choir._ Vouchsafe, O Lord.

_Priest._ Let us pray to the Lord.

_Choir._ Lord, have mercy.

                                _Priest._

O Lord Jesus Christ our God, who hast promised to bestow the kingdom
of heaven upon them that are born again of water and of the spirit and
in a blameless life are translated onto thee, and hast said, Suffer
the children to come unto me, for of such is the kingdom of heaven; we
humbly beseech thee to grant, according to thine undeceiving promise,
the inheritance of thy kingdom unto thy servant, the blameless babe,
_name_, now removed from us; and count us worthy to continue and end
an unblamable and christian life, and to be stablished in heavenly
abiding-places with all thy Saints.

                           _And he exclaimeth,_

For thou art the resurrection, the life, and the repose of all thy
servants, and of thy servant, the babe, _name_, now removed from us, O
Christ our God, and to thee we ascribe glory, with thine unbeginning
Father, and with thy most holy, and good, and life-creating Spirit, now
and ever, and to ages of ages.

_Choir._ Amen.

                            _Then troparion._

Verily everything is vain, and life a shadow is, a dream; for vainly
every earth-born one disquieteth himself, as saith the scripture. When
we have gain’d the world, then dwell we in the grave, where kings and
beggars, elders and babes together are. Therefore, Christ God, as lover
of mankind, rest the departed babe.

                             _Ode iv. Irmos._

I have heard, O Lord, the mystery of thy dispensation....

_Refrain._ Rest thou the babe, O Lord.

We wail not for the babes, but rather for ourselves do we lament, we, who
have always sinn’d, that we may be delivered from gehenna.

Thou, Master, hast depriv’d the babe of the delights of earth: do thou,
as righteous judge, vouchsafe him heavenly blessings.

                                 _Glory._

He hath declared thee a citizen of paradise, O truly happy babe, he who
hath taken thee from earth and ranged thee among the choirs of Saints.

                         _Both now. Theotokion._

All we that are illuminated, O all-pure, own thee God-bearing, thou, O
Ever-virgin; for thou the Sun of righteousness hast borne.

                             _Ode v. Irmos._

Why hast thou rejected me....

_Refrain._ Rest thou the babe, O Lord.

By thy just dooming, ere he waxed perfectly in growth, thou hast, as new
grown herb, cut down the babe whom thou hast taken, Lord; but, leading
him, O Word, to hill divine of everlasting blessings, plant him there.

As a young branch the sword of death hath come and cut thee off, thou
who of worldly sweets no trial hast sustain’d, thou happy one! but, lo,
to thee the gates of heaven Christ open’d hath, counting thee with th’
elect, as being loving-kind.

                                 _Glory._

Concerning me, lament ye not; for I in nowise have begun for weeping to
be meet; but rather weep ye alway for yourselves, ye who have sinn’d, O
kinsfolk and O friends, the dead babe cries, so that of torment ye have
no essay.

                               _Both now._

I am despairing of myself when on the number of my deeds I muse; but when
in mind I bear thee, Mother of God, who above mind didst bear the Lord, I
am refresh’d with hope; for we have thee a sole defence.

                             _Ode vi. Irmos._

I will pour forth a prayer before the Lord, and to him will I tell my
grief; for my soul is full of evils, and my life draweth nigh unto hades,
and I pray as Jonas, O God, raise me out of corruption.

_Refrain._ Rest thou the babe, O Lord.

Thou was laid in a manger as a babe, and wast plac’d in an elder’s arms,
who generatest babes in the womb; and ere this one attain’d perfect
growth, thou hast bidden him to thee. Then we with thanksgiving extol
thee.

Thou didst say to the apostles, O Word, Let the children come unto me;
for my kingdom is for them that are such in wiseness. Then count the babe
remov’d to thee of thy light worthy.

                                 _Glory._

Thou of earth’s blessings hast depriv’d thy babe, that thou of heaven’s
might’st make him sharer, who hath not overstepp’d thy bid divine. O Good
One, we extol thy judgments’ depth unmeasur’d.

                         _Both now. Theotokion._

We have thee, Maiden, as a sheltering wall, for souls a full salvation,
and in afflictions ample room; and in thy light we aye rejoice, and in
this save us now, O Queen, from passions and from dangers.

_Then the irmos. And after the irmos the priest saith the previously
written ectenia and the prayer. Page 139._

                     _Then the condakion, tone viii._

Rest with the Saints, O Christ, thy servant’s soul, where is no pain nor
grief, nor sighing, but life that endeth not.

                                 _Icos._

Thyself alone immortal art, who madest and didst fashion man; for out of
earth we mortals fashion’d were, and unto that same earth shall go, as
thou who madest me hast given command, and sayest unto me, Earth thou
art, and unto earth shalt thou return. And thither all we mortals go,
making the funeral wail, even the song, the Alleluia.

                       _And these following icosi._

More sympathetic than a mother there is none, and than a father more
compassionate none; for vexed are their inward parts when they the babes
accompany hence: great is the sting which for the children’s sake their
hearts receive, and still the more when these sweet-spoken are, and they
their words remember with the song, the Alleluia.

For oft beside the grave they smite their breasts, and say, O thou my son
and sweetest child! hearest thou not thy mother what she saith? lo, ’tis
the womb that thee hath borne: why dost thou speak not as thou wert wont
to speak to us? But so thou silent art, even to say with us the Alleluia.

O God, O God, who callest me, be now the comfort of my house, for great
the wailing is befalling them; for they all have regard to me, even they
who have me as a sole-begotten one. But thou who wast of Virgin Mother
born, refresh the bowels of my mother, and bedew my father’s heart, even
with this, the Alleluia.

                     _Then the condakion, tone viii._

Rest with the Saints....

                            _Ode vii. Irmos._

The hebrew children in the furnace.

_Refrain._ Rest thou the babe, O Lord.

Write in the book of them that saved be, as lover of mankind
compassionate, thy babe, that he rejoicing may exclaim to thy might’s
glory, Thou art bless’d.

By, O thou Word, thy countenance’s light, illuminate thy babe, who now
to thee in faith, at an untimely age, is gone, and sings to thee, Thou
blessed art, O Lord, O God.

                                 _Glory._

Affliction’s cause thy going hence now seemeth unto them that thee have
lov’d, but unto thee procuracy in truth of gladness and of joy; for thou,
O babe, inheritest eternal life.

                         _Both now. Theotokion._

Behold my grief, O Virgin, which th’ abundance of mine ills doth bring on
me, and ere my going hence give me refreshment by thy mother prayers to
make God merciful to me.

                            _Ode viii. Irmos._

The furnace seven times more....

_Refrain._ Rest thou the babe, O Lord.

In Abraham’s bosom, in tabernacles of repose, where is their joy who ever
festal keep, in places of refreshment where living water is, may Christ
thee place, yea, he who for our sake became a child, even ours who unto
him cry ceaselessly, O priests, extol him, and, O people, set him up for
aye.

A constant cause of grief to us, yea, and for tears, thine ever thought
on parting is in truth become; for ere the tasting in this life of things
that give delight thou hast left earth, yea, and thy parents’ breasts.
But Abraham’s bosom hath received thee, as babe, and unparticipant of
every stain.

                                 _Glory._

Why mourn ye me, a babe, that hence is gone? lying he cries invisibly:
for I am wont not to be mourn’d; for destin’d is the joy of all the just
for babes: to them that works perform not there meetness is for tears.
But those the song upraise to Christ, O priests, extol him, and, O
people, set him up for aye.

                         _Both now. Theotokion._

To mine assistance, O God-bearing one, arise, attend unto my prayer, and
me deliver from the dreadful doom, the grave essay, the darkness, and the
fire, the gnashing of the teeth, the contumely of demons, and from every
need, thou hope of them that have no hope, thou, the despairing’s life.

                             _Ode ix. Irmos._

Be thou in dread concerning this, O heaven, and let earth’s limits be
amaz’d: for God hath shewn himself in flesh to men, and wider than the
heavens thy womb becomes. Therefore the principals of Angels and of men
thee magnify, God-bearing one.

_Refrain._ Rest thou the babe, O Lord.

Christ, who unchang’d becam’st a babe, and willingly didst bear the
cross, and the maternal pain didst see of her that gave thee birth;
assuage the grief and bitter pain of faithful parents of a babe deceas’d,
that we thy might may glorify.

Master, thou King of all, who from on high didst send and take the happy
babe as a pure bird to heavenly nest, thou hast from diverse snares
preserv’d his soul, and join’d it with the righteous souls thy kingdom’s
sweets that taste.

                                 _Glory._

To babes that nothing have perform’d, O Word of God, thou hast vouchsaf’d
a heavenly dwelling-place; for so thou art well-pleas’d, O blessed one,
with these to count up thy creation; and, taking now the babe to thee, do
thou thyself alleviate the parents’ pain, as all-compassionate and lover
of mankind.

                         _Both now. Theotokion._

The heart’s eyes turn I ever unto thee, who hast maternal prayer with him
who birth receiv’d from thee; for I entreat thee, O All-pure, Quell thou
the passions of my soul, rouse me betimes to penitence, O maid, and with
thy light enlighten me.

                        _Then the little ectenia._

                        _And the exapostilarion._

Now am I at rest, and much forgiveness have receiv’d; for I have passed
from corruption, and am translated unto life: glory to thee, O Lord.

                        _And the people the same._

_Verse._ Man is as grass, his day is as a flower of the field.

_Verse._ For his spirit goeth forth through him, and he shall not be.

_Verse._ And the mercy of the Lord shall endure to ages.

                 _And to each verse the exapostilarion._

                         _Then, Glory. Both now._

Now have I chosen the maiden Mother of God; for Christ, redeemer of all,
was born of her: glory to thee, O Lord.

                 _And straightway the priest exclaimeth,_

For holy art thou, O our God, and thou restest on the Saints, and to thee
we ascribe glory, to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost,
now and ever, and to ages of ages.

_Choir._ Amen. _And they sing_, Holy God....

                          _Prokimenon, tone vi._

Blessed is the way in which thou goest to-day, O soul....

_Verse._ Return, O my soul, unto thy rest.

             _The epistle to the Corinthians, section clxii._

Brethren, all flesh is not the same.... _ending_, a quickening spirit.[49]

_Verse._ Blessed is he whom thou hast chosen and received, O Lord.

_Verse._ His soul shall dwell in good things.

                   _The gospel from John, section xxi._

The Lord spake unto the Jews that came unto him, I am the bread of
life.... _ending_, at the last day.[50]

_And straightway the last kiss is given, while the singers sing these
stichera. Tone viii._

_Like_, O most glorious wonder!

Who would not weep, my child, because of thy lamented taking from this
life; for thou, a babe unwax’d in growth, from the maternal arms, like
to a bird, hast quickly flown, and unto all things’ Maker hast betaken
thee. O child! who would not weep, beholding faded thy clear face, which
erewhile beauteous as a lily was? Who would not sigh, my child, and would
not cry with wailing because of thy much comeliness, and for the charm of
thine estate? for as a ship that leaves no track thou quickly from the
eyes art gone. Come, ye, my friends, kinsfolk, and neighbours, and, along
with me, let us him kiss whom send we to the grave.

Death is the freeing of the babes; for unparticipants of ills of life
they are declar’d, and unto rest attain, and they in Abraham’s bosom
with heavenly joys are glad, and now along with holy babes in choirs
divine rejoice, and festal high in faith they keep; for from corruption,
through the love of sin, they, being pure, translated are.

                            _Glory. Tone vi._

On Adam pain befell of old in Eden through the tasting of the tree, when
bane the serpent spued; for thereby death hath come on the omnigenous man
who ate. But the Lord came, subdued the serpent, and repose bestow’d on
us. Then let us cry to him, O Saviour, spare, and rest with thine elect
him whom thou hast receiv’d.

                         _Both now. Theotokion._

Thou that alleviation art for those in grief, deliverance of the weak,
God-bearing Virgin, save the city and the folk, thou that for those at
enmity art peace, for tempest-tost a calm, the faithful’s sole defence.

_Then_, Trisagion. O most holy Trinity.... Our Father.... For thine is
the Kingdom....

_Then the troparion_, With the spirits of the righteous.... _Page 138._

_And he commemorateth according to custom, saying the previously written
ectenia, and the prayer. Page 139._

_Then the deacon._ Wisdom.

_Choir._ The more honourable than the Cherubim.... _Glory. Both now._
Lord, have mercy, _thrice_. Bless.

                 _And the priest maketh this dismissal._

Thou that didst arise from the dead, and hast dominion over quick and
dead, Christ our true God, through the prayers of thy most pure Mother,
and of all thy Saints, place the soul of the babe, _name_, removed from
us, in holy tabernacles, and number it with the just, as being good and
the lover of mankind.

_Choir._ Amen.

               _And after the dismissal the priest saith,_

Thy remembrance is everlasting, O thou deservedly blessed and ever
remembered babe, _name_.

_And the choir singeth thrice_, Everlasting remembrance.

                _After this the priest saith this prayer,
            the deacon having said_, Let us pray to the Lord,
                   _and the singers_, Lord, have mercy.

O Lord, who guardest babes in the life that now is, and in the world
to come preparest for them the amplitude of Abraham’s bosom, and, for
their purity, bright angelic places where the souls of the righteous are
established; do thou thyself, O Lord Christ, accept in peace the soul of
thy servant, the babe, _name_. For thou hast said, Suffer the children to
come unto me, for of such is the kingdom of heaven. For to thee is due
all glory, honour, and worship, with the Father, and with the Holy Ghost,
now and ever, and to ages of ages. Amen.

_And, taking up the body, they go to the grave, preceded by the priests
and deacons and all the clergy, singing_, Holy God....

_And, the remains having been laid in the grave, the presiding priest,
taking a shovel, scattereth earth in the grave, saying,_

The earth is the Lord’s, and the fulness thereof, the world and all they
that dwell therein.

                _And they depart giving thanks unto God._

                      _End of the burial of a babe._

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




_Chapter XX._

THE ORDER OF THE LESSER SANCTIFICATION OF WATER.


_A table covered with brocade is placed in the middle of the church in
the customary place, and water in a stoup. And the priest, having put
on epitrachelion and phelonion, and holding in his hand the honourable
cross with an aspergillus, is preceded by the deacon with the censer, and
by two light-bearers with tapers. And having come before the table, he
layeth thereupon the cross, and, taking the censer, he censeth the water
crosswise, and beginneth as customarily. And the priest having blessed,
we begin psalm cxlii._

O Lord, hear my prayer....

_Then_, God is the Lord, and hath manifested himself unto us.... _thrice,
in tone iv_.

                   _And the present troparia, tone iv._

To the God-bearing one we now earnestly hie, we, sinful and lowly ones,
and bow down, crying in penitence from the depth of the soul, Help us, O
Queen, being pitiful unto us: make speed, we are undone by the multitude
of iniquities: turn not thy servants empty away; for thee we hold indeed
an only trust. _Twice._

At no time, will we, unworthy ones, be silent, God-bearing one, to tell
of thy mighty acts; for, hadst thou not prevented with intercession, who
would have delivered us out of so many dangers? and who would have kept
us free until now? We will not turn away from thee, O Queen; for thou
ever savest thy servants from all ills.

_Then, psalm l._ Have mercy upon me, O God....

                 _Then we sing these troparia, tone vi._

Thou that didst receive the salutation of the Angel, and didst bring
forth thy Creator, save, O Virgin, them that magnify thee.

                   _The first troparion is said twice._

We sing praises unto thy Son, God-bearing one, and cry, O most pure
Queen, deliver thy servants from every danger.

Thou art the boast of kings, of prophets and apostles, and of martyrs,
and the mediatress of the world, All-undefiled one.

Every tongue of the orthodox praiseth, and blesseth, and glorifieth thy
most pure childbirth, O god-wedded Mary.

Grant even unto me, an unworthy one, O my Christ, forgiveness of
trespasses, I beseech thee, through the prayers of her that bore thee, as
being compassionate.

I have put my trust in thee, God-bearing one: save me by thy prayers,
and grant me forgiveness of iniquities.

Quicken me, O thou that didst bring forth the life-giver and Saviour:
save me, by thy prayers, thou blessed trust of our souls.

All-undefiled Virgin, who didst conceive in thy womb the Creator of all
things, save our souls by thy prayers.

God-bearing one all-praised, who by word didst above word bring forth the
Word, pray him to save our souls.

Propitiate towards me the judge and thy Son, me, above every man most
iniquitous, effecting this by thy prayers, O thou Queen.

As it is meet we cry to thee, Hail, God-bearing one, pure ever-virgin!
entreating to be saved by thy prayers.

Deliver me from the everlasting fire and the torments that await me, O
parent of God, that I may bless thee.

Despise not the supplications of thy servants, O Queen all-extolled, we
beseech thee, that we may be delivered from every besetment,

From ailments, and from all afflictions, and from dangers deliver us,
even us who fly to thy sacred protection.

Strange is the wonder appertaining thee, God-conceiving one; for the
creator of all things, and our God, for our sake and like us, was born of
thee.

Thy temple, God-bearing one, is declared a free hospital for the sick,
and a place of consolation for afflicted souls.

Most holy God-bearing one, who didst bring forth the Saviour, save thy
servants from dangers, and from every other necessity.

Deliver thy servants from every approaching menace, O most pure Queen,
and from every spiritual and bodily harm.

By thy prayers, O God-bearing Virgin, save all them that betake
themselves to thee, and deliver them from every want and affliction.

Who hieth to thy temple, O most pure God-bearing one, and receiveth not
quickly a spiritual and also a bodily healing?

O Compassionate One, who art besought by all saints and by hosts on high,
cleanse me through her that bore thee.

Spare, O Saviour, the souls of our brethren, who have died in hope of
life, and pardon and forgive their iniquities.

Hail, Virgin, propitiation of the world! hail, vase of divine manna and
golden candlestick of light, O Bride of God!

We sing thee, one God in Trinity, uttering the thrice-holy voice, and
praying that we may obtain salvation.

                                 _Glory._

O Virgin, who didst bring forth the Saviour, and Master, and Lord of the
world! beseech him to save our souls.

                               _Both now._

Hail, mountain! hail, bush! hail, gate! hail, ladder! hail, divine table!
hail, Queen, aid of all!

Through the prayers, O Gracious One, of thy most pure Mother, and of all
thy Saints, bestow thy mercies upon thy people.

Through the prayers of the glorious Archangels and Angels, and of the
hosts on high, safeguard thy servants, O Saviour.

Through the prayers of thine honourable and glorious Baptist, the
prophet, the forerunner, O Christ, my Saviour, preserve thy servants.

Through the prayers of glorious apostles and martyrs, and of all thy
Saints, bestow thy mercies upon thy people.

Through the prayers of the glorious unmercenary ones, O God-bearing one,
preserve thy servants, as being the protection and stablishing of the
world.

                                 _Glory._

Let us glorify the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost, saying, O
Holy Trinity, save our souls.

                               _Both now._

Thou that unspeakably to the uttermost didst conceive and bring forth thy
Creator, save, O Virgin, them that magnify thee.

                                                                   _Then,_

Open unto us the gates of mercy, O blessed God-bearing one, that we
perish not who put our trust in thee, but through thee may we be
delivered from dangers; for thou art the salvation of the christian race.

_Then_, Let us pray to the Lord.

_Priest._ For holy art thou, O our God....

_Choir._ Amen.

                  _Then the present troparia, tone vi._

Now present is the time that halloweth all, and the just Judge awaiteth
us. Then turn thyself to penitence, O soul, exclaiming, as the harlot
did, with tears, O Lord, be merciful to me.

Thou, who to-day the healing fountain in the Virgin’s all-revered temple
hast with waters shower’d, dost with the sprinkling of thy blessing quell
the ailments of the weak, O Christ, physician of our bodies and our souls.

A virgin who no nuptials knew thou didst bring forth, and thou, unwedded
mother, virgin didst remain, God-bearing Mary: O pray Christ our God that
we be sav’d.

Most pure God-bearing Virgin, do thou direct our works, and pray for
pardon of our trespasses, as we the angelic song upraise,

Holy God, holy mighty one, holy immortal one, have mercy upon us.

_And it is sung as customarily, and, after the trisagion, the deacon
saith_, Let us attend.

_Priest._ Peace to all.

_Choir._ And to thy spirit.

                   _Reader, the prokimenon, tone iii._

The Lord is mine illumination and my Saviour, whom shall I fear?

_Verse._ The Lord is the defence of my life, of whom shall I be afraid?

               _The epistle to the Hebrews, section cccvi._

Brethren, he that sanctifieth ... _ending_, them that are tempted[51]

_Priest._ Peace to thee.

                           _Alleluia, tone vi._

_Verse i._ My heart uttereth a good word.

_Verse ii._ I speak of my works unto the King.

                   _The gospel from John, section xiv._

At that time Jesus went up ..., _ending_, whatsoever disease he had.[52]

                      _Then the deacon the ectenia._

In peace let us pray to the Lord.

For the peace that is from above....

For the peace of the whole world....

For this holy temple....

For the Most Holy Governing Synod....

For our Most Pious....

That he would assist them and subdue under Their feet....

For this city.... (_if it is a monastery_)

For this holy habitation....

For healthiness of weather....

For them that voyage, that journey....

That this water may be hallowed by the might, and operation, and
visitation of the Holy Ghost.

That there may come down into this water the cleansing operation of the
supersubstantial Trinity.

That this water may be to the healing of soul and body, and to the
turning aside of every opposing might.

That the Lord God may send down the blessing of Jordan, and hallow this
water.

For all them that need help and assistance from God.

That we may be illuminated with the illumination of understanding by the
consubstantial Trinity.

That the Lord God may declare us sons and inheritors of his kingdom,
through partaking of this water, and through being sprinkled therewith.

For our deliverance from every affliction....

Help us, save us, have mercy on us....

Commemorating our most holy, most pure....

_Choir._ To thee, O Lord.

                              _Exclamation._

For to thee is due all glory....

                           _Then this prayer._

O Lord our God, mighty in counsel, and wonderful in works, Maker of all
creation, who keepest thy covenant and thy mercy towards them that love
thee and that keep thy commandments, who acceptest the piteous tears of
all them that are in need; for for this cause thou didst come in the
form of a servant, not terrifying us with phantoms, but vouchsafing true
bodily healing, and saying, Behold, thou art made whole, sin no more:
yea, thou didst with clay restore the eyes of the blind, and didst bid
him wash, and by a word didst make him see, O thou that breakest the
waves of adverse passions, and driest up the salt sea of this life,
and quellest the billows of lusts that are hard to be endured; do thou
thyself, O man-loving King, who hast given unto us to be invested with a
snow-white robe by water and the Spirit, by the partaking of this water,
and by being sprinkled therewith, send down upon us thy blessing, which
taketh away the defilement of passions. Yea, O Blessed One, we pray thee
to visit our infirmities, and to heal our spiritual and bodily weaknesses
by thy mercy: through the prayers of our altogether most pure, most
blessed Lady, the God-bearing ever-virgin Mary; through the might of the
honourable and life-effecting cross; through the intercessions of the
honourable heavenly bodiless hosts; of the honourable glorious prophet,
forerunner, and baptist, John; of the holy glorious and all-praised
apostles; of our venerable and god-bearing fathers; of our fathers in
the saints, the great hierarchs and ecumenical doctors, Basil the great,
Gregory the theologian, and John Chrysostom; of our fathers in the
saints, Athanasius and Cyril, patriarchs of Alexandria; of our father in
the saints, Spyridon, wonderworker of Trimythes; of our father in the
saints, archbishop Nicolas, wonderworker of Myrlicia; of our fathers
in the saints, Peter, Alexis, Jonas, and Philip, wonderworkers of all
Russia; of the holy and glorious great martyr, George, the triumphant;
of the holy and glorious great martyr, Demetrius, the myrrh-emitter: of
the holy and excellently victorious martyrs; of the holy and righteous
god-progenitors, Joakim and Anna; of the holy glorious and unmercenary
wonderworkers, Cosmas and Damian, Cyrus and John, Pantelimon and
Hermolaus, Sampson and Diomed, Mocius and Anicetus, Thalaleus and
Tryphon; and of the holy, _name_, whose memory we keep, and of all thy
Saints.

And preserve, O Lord, thy Servant, our Most Pious, Autocratic, Great
Lord, THE EMPEROR ALEXANDER ALEXANDROVITCH, of all Russia. _Thrice._

And His Consort, the Most Pious Lady, THE EMPRESS MARIA THEODOROVNA.

And His Heir, the Right-believing Lord, the Cesarevitch and Grand Duke,
NICOLAUS ALEXANDROVITCH, and all the reigning House.

Save, O Lord, and have mercy upon the Most Holy Governing Synod, give
unto them spiritual and bodily health, and be gracious in all things to
this thy ministration of the christian polity. Remember, O Lord, every
episcopate of the right-believers, that rightly divide the word of thy
truth, and every priestly and monastic order, and their salvation.
Remember, O Lord, them that hate and them that love us, our ministering
brethren here present, and them that for a blessed cause are absent and
have desired us, unworthy ones, to pray for them. Remember, O Lord, our
brethren that are in bonds and afflictions, and have mercy upon them
according to thy great mercy, delivering them from every need. For thou
art the fountain of healing, O Christ our God, and to thee we ascribe
glory, with thine unbeginning Father, and with thy most holy, and good,
and life-creating Spirit, now and ever, and to ages of ages.

_Choir._ Amen.

_Priest._ Peace to all.

_Choir._ And to thy spirit.

_Deacon._ Bow your heads to the Lord.

_Choir._ To thee, O Lord.

                  _And the priest secretly the prayer._

Incline thine ear, O Lord, and hearken unto us, thou who didst vouchsafe
to be baptized in Jordan, and didst hallow the waters; and do thou bless
us all, who through the bending of our necks indicate the representation
of service; and count us worthy to be filled with thy sanctification
through the partaking of this water; and may it be unto us, O Lord, for
the healing of soul and body.

_Exclamation._ For thou art our sanctification, and to thee we ascribe
glory, and thanksgiving, and worship, with thine unbeginning Father, and
with thine all-holy, and good, and life-creating Spirit, now and ever,
and to ages of ages.

_Choir._ Amen.

_Then, taking the honourable cross, he blesseth the water thrice, dipping
it and raising it perpendicularly in the form of a cross, and singing the
present troparion in tone i thrice._

O Lord, save thy people, and bless thine inheritance, granting victory to
our Right-believing EMPEROR, _name_, over enemies, and preserving thine
estate by thy cross.

           _And after this they sing this troparion, tone ii._

Make us worthy of thy gifts, O God-bearing Virgin, overlooking our
iniquities, and vouchsafing cures unto them that in faith receive thy
blessing, O thou most pure.

_Then the priest kisseth the honourable cross, as also do all the people,
and he sprinkleth all with the sanctified water, and the altar, and the
whole church. And the people sing the present troparia, tone iv._

Having a fountain of remedies, O holy unmercenary ones, ye bestow
healings unto all that are in need, as being counted worthy of mighty
gifts from the ever-flowing fountain of our Saviour; for the Lord hath
said unto you, as unto co-emulators of the apostles, Behold, I have given
unto you power over unclean spirits so as to cast them out, and to heal
every sickness and every wound. Therefore in his commandments having
virtuously liv’d, freely ye receiv’d, freely ye bestow, healing the
sufferings of our souls and bodies.

Attend unto the supplications of thy servants, thou altogether undefiled
one, quelling the uprisings of evils against us, and releasing us from
every affliction; for thee we have alone a sure and certain confirmation,
and we have gained thy mediation that we may not be put to shame, O
Queen, who call upon thee, Be instant in supplication for them that
faithfully exclaim to thee, Hail, Queen, thou aid of all, the joy and
safeguard, and salvation of our souls!

Accept the prayers of thy servants, O Queen, and deliver us from every
necessity and grief.

                _And, after the sprinkling, the ectenia._

Have mercy upon us, O God....

Furthermore let us pray for the preservation of this holy habitation,
and of every city and country, from famine, pestilence, earthquake,
flood, fire, sword, invasion of strangers, and civil war, that our good
and man-loving God may be gracious and favourably disposed to turn away
from us every rage that riseth against us, and to deliver us from his
impending and righteous threatening, and to have mercy upon us.

Lord, have mercy, _xl_.

                       _And the priest exclaimeth,_

Hear us, O God our Saviour, thou hope of all the ends of the earth....
_and the rest_.

_Choir._ Amen.

_Priest._ Peace to all.

_Choir._ And to thy spirit.

_Deacon._ Let us bow our heads to the Lord.

_Choir._ To thee, O Lord.

                 _Priest, this prayer with a loud voice._

O most merciful Master, O Lord Jesus Christ our God, through the prayers
of our all-holy Lady, the God-bearing ever-virgin Mary; through the might
of the honourable and life-effecting cross; through the intercession
of the honourable heavenly bodiless hosts; of the honourable glorious
prophet, forerunner, and baptist, John; of the holy glorious and
all-praised apostles; of the holy glorious and excellently victorious
martyrs; of our venerable and god-bearing fathers; of our fathers in
the saints, the great ecumenical doctors and divines, Basil the great,
Gregory the theologian, and John Chrysostom; of our father in the saints,
archbishop Nicolas, wonderworker of Myrlicia; of our fathers in the
saints, Peter, Alexis, Jonas, and Philip, wonderworkers of all Russia;
of the holy and righteous god-progenitors, Joakim and Anna, _and of the
holy, name, whose is the temple_, and of all thy Saints, make our prayer
acceptable unto thee; grant unto us forgiveness of our iniquities; cover
us with the shelter of thy wings; remove far from us every enemy and
adversary; give peace to our life; O Lord, have mercy upon us, and upon
thy world, and save our souls, as being good and the lover of mankind.

_Choir._ Amen.

                           _And the dismissal._

[Illustration]




[Illustration]




_Chapter XXI._

THE ORDER OF THE GREAT SANCTIFICATION ON THE HOLY THEOPHANY.


_After the priest hath said the prayer behind the ambo, we all go to the
baptismal font, the taper-bearers going in front, and after them the
deacons and priests with the gospel and with incense, while the brethren
sing the present troparia._

                               _Tone viii._

The voice of the Lord crieth upon the waters, saying, O come ye, and all
receive the spirit of wisdom, the spirit of understanding, the spirit of
the fear of God, even Christ, who is made manifest.

                                                                 _Thrice._

To-day the nature of the waters is sanctified, and the Jordan is divided,
and turneth back the flowing of its waters, beholding the baptism of the
Master.

                                                                  _Twice._

As a man thou didst come to the river, O Christ the King, desiring to
receive the baptism of a servant, O thou good one, at the hand of the
Forerunner, because of our sins, O lover of mankind.

                                                                  _Twice._

                    _Glory. Both now. The same tone._

To the voice crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord,
thou didst come, O Lord, taking the form of a servant, asking for
baptism, thou who knowest not sin. The waters beheld thee, and were
afraid. The Forerunner became trembling, and cried, saying, How shall
the lamp of light be lighted? how shall the servant lay hands upon the
Master? Sanctify thou me and the waters, O Saviour, thou that takest away
the sins of the world.

_And straightway, standing by the baptismal font, the deacon saith_,
Wisdom.

            _And the reader, the reading from the prophesy of
                                 Esaias._

                              _Chap. xxxv._

Thus saith the Lord, Let the thirsty desert be glad, let the wilderness
rejoice, and blossom as a rose, and let them bud forth and be exceedingly
glad. And let the desert of Jordan rejoice, and the glory of Libanus
shall be given unto it, and the honour of Carmel, and my people shall
behold the glory of the Lord, and the exaltedness of God. Strengthen ye
the weak hands, and comfort ye the feeble knees; and say unto them that
are faint-hearted in intention, Be ye strong, and fear not, behold our
God will render judgment, he will come and save us. Then shall the eyes
of the blind be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall hear. Then shall
the lame man leap as an hart, and the tongue of the deaf be distinct;
for in the wilderness shall water break out, and a ravine in a thirsty
land. And waterless places shall become pools, and in a thirsty land
shall be a spring of water: there shall be joy of birds, abodes of
syrens, and reeds and pools. And there shall be a pure way, and it shall
be called a holy way; and the impure shall not pass there, neither shall
an impure way be there, and the dispersed shall walk therein, and shall
not wander. And no lion shall be there, nor of evil beasts shall one
enter there, nor be found there; but the redeemed and chosen of the Lord
shall walk therein. And they shall return and come to Sion with joy and
gladness, and everlasting joy shall be upon their heads: praise, and
gladness, and joy shall penetrate them, and pain, grief, and sighing
shall flee away.

                _The reading from the prophecy of Esaias._

                               _Chap. lv._

Thus saith the Lord, O every one that thirsteth, come ye to the water,
and as many as have no money, come ye, buy, and eat and drink, wine
and fat, without money and without price. Wherefore do ye spend money
for that which is not bread, and labour for that which satisfieth not?
hearken ye to me, and eat that which is good, and let your soul delight
itself in good things. Incline your ears, and follow in my ways; hearken
unto me, and your soul shall live in good things; and I will promise
unto you an everlasting testament, even faithful things befitting unto
David. Behold, I have given him to be a testimony among the nations, a
prince and a commander among the nations. Behold, nations that have not
known thee shall call upon thee, and people that have not recognised
thee shall have recourse unto thee, because of the Lord thy God and the
holy one of Israel, for I have glorified thee. Seek ye God, and, when ye
have found him, call upon him, if haply he may draw nigh unto you. Let
the impious forsake his ways, and the transgressing man his counsels;
and turn ye unto the Lord your God, and ye shall be pitied; for in much
wise he forgiveth your sins. For my counsels are not as your counsels,
neither as your ways are my ways, saith the Lord. For as the heaven
standeth far from the earth, so standeth my way from your ways, and your
contemplations from my thoughts. For as the rain or the snow cometh down
from heaven, and returneth not thither, until it soaketh the earth, and
generateth, and increaseth, and giveth seed to the sower, and bread to
the eater, so shall my word be which goeth out of my lips, and returneth
not unto me void, until it accomplisheth all that I have wished, and
furthereth my ways and my commandments. For ye shall go forth with joy,
and be taught with gladness: for the mountains and the hills shall leap,
expecting you with joy, and all the trees of the field shall clap their
hands. And instead of the thorn shall come up the cypress, and instead of
the nettle shall come up the myrtle; and it shall be to the Lord for a
name and for an everlasting sign, and it shall not be cut off.

                _The reading from the prophecy of Esaias._

                               _Chap. xii._

Thus saith the Lord, Ye shall draw water with joy out of wells of
salvation. And thou shalt say in that day, Confess ye unto the Lord, and
call upon his name, declare his glory unto the nations, make mention that
his name is exalted. Sing ye the name of the Lord, for he hath wrought
excellent things: declare ye these throughout all lands. Rejoice and be
glad, ye that dwell in Sion, for the holy one of Israel is exalted in the
midst thereof.

_Deacon._ Wisdom.

                     _Reader, prokimenon, tone iii._

The Lord is mine illumination, and my Saviour, whom shall I fear?

_Verse._ The Lord is the defence of my life, of whom shall I be afraid?

          _The epistle to the Corinthians, section cxliii, from
                         the paragraph, Chap. x._

Brethren, I would not that ye should be ignorant how that all our fathers
were under the cloud, and all passed through the sea; and were all
baptized unto Moses in the cloud and in the sea; and did all eat the
same spiritual meat, and did all drink the same spiritual drink; for they
drank of the spiritual rock that followed them, and the rock was Christ.

                           _Alleluia, tone iv._

_Verse._ The voice of the Lord is upon the waters, the God of glory
thundereth, the Lord is upon many waters.

               _The gospel from Mark, section ii. Chap. i._

At that time Jesus came from Nazareth of Galilee, and was baptized of
John in Jordan. And straightway coming up out of the water, he saw the
heavens opened, and the Spirit like a dove descending upon him. And there
was a voice from heaven, saying, Thou art my beloved Son, in whom I am
well pleased.

                   _And the deacon saith the ectenia._

In peace let us pray to the Lord.

For the peace that is from above....

For the peace of the whole world....

For this holy temple....

For the Most Holy Governing Synod....

For our Most Pious, Autocratic Great Lord, THE EMPEROR ALEXANDER
ALEXANDROVITCH of all Russia; and for His Consort, the Most Pious Lady,
THE EMPRESS MARIA THEODOROVNA.

For His Heir, the Right-believing Lord, the Cesarevitch and Grand Duke
NICOLAUS ALEXANDROVITCH; and for all the Reigning House.

That he would assist Them, and subdue....

For this city, (_if it is a monastery_, For this holy habitation)....

For healthiness of weather....

For them that voyage, that journey....

That this water may be hallowed by the might, and operation, and descent
of the Holy Ghost, let us pray to the Lord.

That there may come down into these waters the cleansing operation of the
supersubstantial Trinity, let us pray to the Lord.

That there may be bestowed upon them the grace of redemption, the
blessing of Jordan, through the might, and operation, and descent of the
holy Ghost, let us pray to the Lord.

That he would quickly beat down satan under our feet, and destroy every
evil counsel that he conceiveth against us, let us pray to the Lord.

That the Lord our God may deliver us from every evil device, and from the
essay of the adversary, and may count us worthy of promised blessings,
let us pray to the Lord.

That we may be illuminated with the illumination of understanding and
piety through the descent of the Holy Ghost, let us pray to the Lord.

That the Lord God would send down the blessing of Jordan, and hallow
these waters, let us pray to the Lord.

That this water may be a gift of sanctification, a loosing of sins, for
the healing of soul and body, and for every befitting need, let us pray
to the Lord.

That this water may well up unto eternal life, let us pray to the Lord.

That it may be manifested to the destruction of every counsel of visible
and invisible enemies, let us pray to the Lord.

For them that laid and draw thereof for the sanctification of houses, let
us pray to the Lord.

That it may be to the cleansing of soul and body of all that with faith
draw and partake of it, let us pray to the Lord.

That we may be counted worthy to be filled with sanctification through
the partaking of these waters, by the invisible manifestation of the Holy
Ghost, let us pray to the Lord.

That the Lord God may hearken unto the voice of the prayer of us sinners,
and have mercy upon us, let us pray to the Lord.

For our deliverance from every affliction....

Help us, save us, have mercy....

Commemorating our most holy, most pure, most blessed....

            _While these are being said, the priest saith this
                            prayer secretly._

Lord Jesus Christ, the only-begotten Son, that art in the bosom of the
Father, O thou true God, fountain of life and immortality, thou light
of light, that camest into the world to enlighten it; do thou dawn
upon our mind by thy Holy Ghost, and accept us offering magnifying and
thanksgiving unto thee for thy wonderful mighty works from eternity, and
for thy saving providence in these last ages, in which thou hast assumed
our impotent and poor substance, and, condescending to the estate of
a servant, who art King of all things, didst furthermore endure to be
baptized in Jordan by the hand of a servant, that thou, the sinless one,
having sanctified the nature of water, mightest lead us unto regeneration
by water and the spirit, and stablish us in the aforetime liberty.
And, celebrating the memory of this divine mystery, we beseech thee, O
man-loving Master, Sprinkle thou also upon us, thine unworthy servants,
according to thy divine promise, pure water, the gift of thy tenderness,
that the prayer of us sinners over this water may be acceptable through
thy grace, and that thereby thy blessing may be bestowed upon us and upon
all thy faithful people, to the glory of thy holy and adorable name. For
to thee is due all glory, honour, and worship, with thine unbeginning
Father, and with thy most holy, and good, and life-creating Spirit, now
and ever, and to ages of ages.

_And he saith to himself_, Amen.

_And when the deacon hath finished the ectenia, the priest beginneth this
prayer with a loud voice._

Great art thou, O Lord, and wonderful are thy works, and no word shall
be sufficient for the praise of thy wonders.

                                                                 _Thrice._

For thou by thy will hast from, nothingness brought all things into
being, and, by thy power, thou sustainest creation, and, by thy
foreknowledge, directest the world. Thou from four elements hast formed
creation, and hast crowned the circle of the year with four seasons. All
the spiritual powers tremble before thee, the sun praiseth thee, the
moon glorifieth thee, the stars make intercession with thee, the light
hearkeneth unto thee, the depths shudder at thy presence, the springs
of water serve thee. Thou hast stretched out the heavens as a curtain,
thou hast founded the earth upon the waters, thou hast bounded the sea
with sand, thou hast diffused the air for breathing. The angelic powers
minister unto thee, the choirs of archangels worship thee, the many-eyed
cherubim, and the six-winged seraphim, standing and flying around, cover
themselves with fear of thine unapproachable glory. For thou, being the
uninscribable, unbeginning and unspeakable God, didst come down upon
earth, taking the form of a servant, being made in the likeness of men;
for thou, O Master, through the tenderness of thy mercy, didst not endure
to behold the race of men tormented by the devil, but thou didst come and
save us. We confess thy grace, we proclaim thy mercy, we conceal not thy
beneficence. Thou hast set at liberty the generations of our nature,
thou didst hallow the virginal womb by thy birth. All creation praiseth
thee who didst manifest thyself; for thou, O our God, wast seen upon
earth, and didst dwell together with men. Thou didst hallow the streams
of Jordan, sending down from heaven thy Holy Ghost, and didst crush the
heads of the dragons that lurked therein.

_And the priest then saith this thrice, and blesseth the water with his
hand at each verse._

Do thou thyself, O man-loving King, be present now also through the
descent of thy Holy Ghost, and sanctify this water.

And give it the grace of redemption, the blessing of Jordan. Make it a
fountain of incorruption, a gift of sanctification, a loosing of sins,
a healing of sicknesses, a destruction of demons, unapproachable by
hostile powers, fulfilled with angelic strength, that all they that draw
and partake thereof may have it for the cleansing of souls and bodies,
for the healing of sufferings, for the sanctification of houses, and for
every befitting need. For thou art our God, who through water and the
spirit hast renewed our nature fallen through sin: thou art our God,
who through water didst overwhelm sin in the time of Noe: thou art our
God, who through the sea by Moses didst deliver the Hebrew race from the
servitude of Pharao: thou art our God, who didst divide the rock in the
wilderness, and it gushed waters and poured streams, and satisfied thy
thirsty people: thou art our God, who through water and fire by Elias
didst convert Israel from the error of Baal.

And do thou thyself now, O Master, sanctify this water by thy Holy Ghost.

                                                                 _Thrice._

And grant unto all them that touch it, and partake thereof, and are
sprinkled therewith, sanctification, healing, cleansing, and blessing.

Save, O Lord, thy Servant, our Most Pious, Autocratic Great Lord, THE
EMPEROR ALEXANDER ALEXANDROVITCH of all Russia, _thrice_.

And his Consort, the Most Pious Lady, THE EMPRESS MARIA THEODOROVNA.

And His Heir, the Right-believing Lord, the Cesarevitch and Grand Duke,
NICOLAUS ALEXANDROVITCH, and all the Reigning House.

Save, O Lord, and have mercy upon the Most Holy Governing Synod.

And keep them under thy protection in peace, subdue under Them every
enemy and adversary, grant unto Them all desires for salvation and
eternal life, that by elements, and by men, and by angels, and by things
visible and invisible thy most holy name may be glorified, with the
Father and the Holy Ghost, now and ever, and to ages of ages. Amen.

_Priest._ Peace to all.

_Deacon._ Bow your heads to the Lord.

                    _Priest, the bowing down prayer._

Incline thine ear, O Lord, and hearken unto us, thou that didst vouchsafe
to be baptized in Jordan, and didst hallow the waters; and bless us all,
who through the bending of our necks indicate the representation of
service; and count us worthy to be filled with thy sanctification through
partaking of this water; and may it be to us, O Lord, for the healing of
soul and body.

                              _Exclamation._

For thou art our sanctification, and to thee we ascribe glory, and
thanksgiving, and worship, with thine unbeginning Father, and with thy
Most Holy, and good, and life-creating Spirit, now and ever, and to ages
of ages. Amen.

_And straightway, blessing the water crosswise with the honourable cross,
he dippeth it perpendicularly, sinking it in the Water and raising it,
holding it with both hands, and singing the present troparion in tone i._

In Jordan when thou wast baptized, O Lord, the worship of the Trinity was
manifested; for the Parent’s voice bore witness unto thee, naming thee
the well-beloved Son; and the Spirit, in appearance of a dove, testified
to the surety of the word. Thou who wast manifested, O Christ God, and
enlightenest the world, glory to thee.

                  _And the same is sung by the singers._

_Again a second time in like manner he signeth the water. And a third
tune in like manner. And the priest, having taken of the sanctified water
in a salver, turneth himself with his face towards the west, holding the
cross in his left hand and the aspergillus in his right. And first the
president approacheth, and kisseth the honourable cross, and the priest
signeth him in the face with the aspergillus with the sanctified water.
Then the priests come forward in their order. And after this all the
brotherhood in order._

                           _And the troparion,_

In Jordan when thou wast baptized, O Lord.... _is sung many times, until
all the brotherhood are sanctified with the sprinkling of the water_.

_And straightway we go into the temple, singing the idiomelon, tone vi._

Ye faithful, let us sing the greatness of God’s providence for us; for
he that for our sins became a man, in Jordan for our cleansing cleansed
was, himself alone being pure and uncorrupt, me hallowing and the waters,
and the dragons’ heads crushing the water in. Then, brethren, let us
water draw with joy; for unto them that draw in faith the Spirit’s grace
invisibly is given by Christ, the God and Saviour of our souls.

_Then_, Blessed be the name of the Lord.... _thrice_.

_And Psalm xxxiii._ I will bless the Lord at all times....

_And, first having drunk of the sanctified water, we receive the
antidoron from the priest. And he maketh the full dismissal._

He that vouchsafed to be baptized in Jordan for our salvation, Christ our
true God, through the prayers of his Most Pure Mother, and of all the
Saints, have mercy upon us and save us, as being good and the lover of
mankind.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

[Illustration]




_Chapter XXIV._

PRAYER AT THE BLESSING OR FLESH-MEAT ON THE HOLY AND GREAT SUNDAY OF
PASCHA.


                           _The priest maketh,_

                          Blessed be our God....

                      Christ is risen.... _thrice_.

                     _Then_, Let us pray to the Lord.

                            Lord, have mercy.

O Lord Jesus Christ, our God, look thou upon flesh-meat, and sanctify
it, as thou didst sanctify the ram which the faithful Abraham brought
unto thee, and as the lamb which Abel offered unto thee as a holocaust,
likewise also as the fatted calf which thou didst bid to be killed for
thy prodigal son when he returned again to thee, that as he was counted
worthy to enjoy thy grace, so may we also enjoy those things that are
sanctified and blessed by thee for the nourishment of us all. For thou
art the true nourishment, and the giver of good things, and to thee we
ascribe glory, with thine unbeginning Father, and with thy most holy, and
good, and life-creating Spirit, now and ever, and to ages of ages. Amen.




_Chapter XXV._

PRAYER AT THE BLESSING OF CHEESE AND EGGS.


Master, Lord our God, author and creator of all things, bless thou
the curdled milk, and with this also the eggs, and preserve us in thy
goodness, that, as we partake of these, we may be filled with thine
ungrudgingly bestowed gifts, and with thine unspeakable goodness. For
thine is the might, and thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the
glory, of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, now and
ever, and to ages of ages. Amen.




_Chapter XXVI._

PRAYER AT THE PARTAKING OF GRAPES ON THE VITH DAY OF AUGUST.


                         Let us pray to the Lord.

                             Lord have mercy.

Bless, O Lord, this new fruit of the vine, which through the salubrity
of the air, and through showers of rain and temperate weather, thou art
well-pleased should at this time attain unto maturity. May our partaking
of this new growth of the vine be for gladness, and for the offering of
a gift unto thee for the cleansing of sins, through the sacred and holy
body of thy Christ, with whom thou art blessed, together with thy most
holy, and good, and life-creating Spirit, now and ever, and to ages of
ages. Amen.

_And be it known that this prayer is said, where there are vineyards,
over grapes, and these are brought into the temple for a blessing on this
sixth day of August. But here in great Russia, where, vineyards are not
found, apples are this day brought into the temple, and the prayer for
them that offer first-fruits is said, of which the beginning is,_

                         Master, Lord our God....

_And likewise other fruits, let each be brought in their season to the
temple for a blessing, and then let the prayer be said over them._




_Chapter XXVII._

PRAYER FOR THEM THAT OFFER FIRST-FRUITS.


Master, Lord our God, who biddest everyone according to their purpose to
offer unto thee thine own of thine own, and bestowest upon them in return
thine everlasting blessings, who didst favourably accept the offering of
as much as she could of the widow; do thou now also accept the things
offered by thy servant, _name_, and vouchsafe to lay up the same in thine
eternal treasury, and grant unto him abundant possession of thy worldly
blessings, together with all things that are serviceable unto him.

For blessed is thy name, and glorified is thy kingdom, of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, now and ever, and to ages of ages.
Amen.




_Chapter XXVIII._

PRAYER AT THE LAYING OF THE FOUNDATION OF A HOUSE.


O God Almighty, who didst make the heaven in understanding, and didst
found the earth on its firmness, thou builder and creator of all; look
upon thy servant, _name_, who purposeth, in the might of thy strength,
to erect a house for habitation, and to set it up with a building. Do
thou stablish the same on a firm rock, and, according to thy divine
evangelical voice, so found it that neither wind nor water, nor
anything whatsoever may be able to injure it. Be pleased to bring it to
completion, and deliver them that desire to live therein from every snare
of the enemy.

For thine is the might, and thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the
glory, of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, now and
ever, and to ages of ages. Amen.




_Chapter XXIX._

PRAYER WHEN ONE ENTERETH INTO A NEW HOUSE.


O God our Saviour, who was pleased to enter in under the roof of
Zaccheus, and didst bring salvation unto him and unto all his house;
do thou thyself now also preserve unhurt from every harm them that have
purposed to live here, and offer unto thee prayers and supplications
through us unworthy ones, blessing those whose dwelling-place is here,
and preserving their life without snares.

For to thee is due all glory, honour, and worship, with thine unbeginning
Father, and with thy most holy, and good, and life-creating Spirit, now
and ever, and to ages of ages. Amen.




[Illustration]




_Chapter XXXIII._

PRAYER FOR ONE THAT PURPOSETH TO GO ON A JOURNEY.


O God, our God, the true and living way, who didst journey with thy
servant Joseph; do thou journey with thy servant, _name_, and deliver him
from every storm and snare, and peace and vigour continually provide.
Be pleased that, having accomplished every intention of righteousness,
according to thy commandment, and being filled with temporal and heavenly
blessings, he may return again.

For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, now and ever, and to ages of ages.
Amen.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




FOOTNOTES


[1] The office for the laying on of hands of a bishop is not found in the
book here mentioned, and consequently no translation of this office will
be found in the present work.

[2] This work also contains the _troparia for the day_ and other matter
not written at length in the text of the present one.

[3] See _Euchology_, chap. xxvii.

[4] These verses form no part of the proper Easter service, but are sung
at Matins on ordinary Sundays. See _Euchology_, page 25.

[5] This Doxology is the one sung at Matins on an ordinary week-day when
no festival is observed. See _Euchology_, page 105. And observe how the
present office, with its Stichera, etc., takes the form of Matins.

[6] These Verses are proper for the Saturday of meat-abstinence. See
_Euchology_, page 261.

[7] This verse is proper to Matins, and serves as a keynote to
indicate whether the occasion is a joyful or a penitential one, it
being superseded by the singing of Alleluia in the latter case. See
_Euchology_, pages 23 and 94.

[8] An exclamation at the celebration of the Liturgy, after the
consecration and the intercession for the dead and living, and before the
ectenia that introduces the Lord’s prayer.

[9] Chap. vi., 3-11.

[10] Chap. xxxviii., 16 ad fin.

[11] The questions that follow, coming down from Byzantine times, though
retained in the _Trébnik_, are not now asked, but the confessor waits for
the penitent to reveal his or her offences, and, when necessary, puts
suitable questions, according to the person’s condition, sex, and age.

[12] Here in the _Trébnik_ follow some instructions respecting the
imposition of penance, which, according to the canons, consists in
prohibition from Holy Communion for a given time for certain grave sins.

[13] Chap. v. 20, ad fin.

[14] Chap. ii. 1-11.

[15] James v: 10-16.

[16] Chap. x. 25-37.

[17] Chap. xv. 1-8.

[18] Chap. xix. 1-10.

[19] 1 Cor. xii. 27—xiii. 8.

[20] Chap. x. 1, 5-8.

[21] 2 Cor. vi. 16—vii. 1.

[22] Chap. viii. 14-23.

[23] 2 Cor. i. 8-11.

[24] Chap. xxv. 1-13.

[25] Chap. v. 22—vi. 2.

[26] Chap. xv., 21-28.

[27] 1 Thess. v., 14-23.

[28] Chap. ix., 9-13.

[29] Psalm xc.

[30] Psalm cxviii.

[31] 1 Thess. iv. 13-17.

[32] Chap. v. 24-30.

[33] Sun. chap. i. 1-8. Mon. chap. i. 12-17 21-26. Tues. chap. ii. 14-21.
Wed. chap. ii. 22-36. Thurs. chap. ii. 38-43. Fri. chap. iii. 1-8. Sat.
chap. iii. 11-16.

[34] Matt. xxviii. 16-20.

[35] 1 Thess. iv. 13-17.

[36] Chap. v. 24-30.

[37] Chap. v. 12 ad fin.

[38] Chap. v. 17-24.

[39] Psalm xxiii.

[40] 1 Cor. xv. 1-11.

[41] Chap. vi. 35-39.

[42] Psalm lxxxiii.

[43] 1 Cor. xv. 20-28.

[44] Chap. vi. 40-44.

[45] Chap. xiv. 6-9.

[46] Chap. vi. 48-54.

[47] Psalms cxlviii, cxlix, and cl.

[48] Psalm xc.

[49] 1 Cor. xv. 39-45.

[50] Chap. vi. 35-39.

[51] Chap. ii. 11 ad fin.

[52] Chap. v. 1-4.




APPENDIX.

THE LAYING ON OF HANDS.




CONTENTS OF APPENDIX.


                                                                     PAGE.

  The office for the appointment of a reader and singer                 5

  The office that is used at the laying on of hands of a subdeacon      9

  The office that is used at the laying on of hands of a deacon        12

  The office that is used at the appointment of an archdeacon and
    a protodeacon                                                      17

  The office that is used at the laying on of hands of a presbyter     18

  The order of the office for the making of a protopresbyter           23

  The office that is used at the appointment of an abbot               24

  The office that is used at the appointment of an archimandrite       27




[Illustration]




THE OFFICE FOR THE APPOINTMENT OF A READER AND SINGER IS PERFORMED ON
THIS WISE.


_He that is to be made a taper-bearer is brought by two subdeacons into
the middle of the church, and he maketh three reverences. And, turning
himself, he boweth thrice to the Archpriest; and, having been conducted
to the Archpriest, he boweth his head, and the Archpriest signeth him
crosswise with the hand upon his head thrice. And after this, placing his
hand upon his head, he saith this prayer._

Lord, who with the light of thy wonders enlightenest all Creation, who
knowest the intention of each before it is formed, and strengthenest them
that desire to serve thee; do thou thyself adorn with thine unspotted
and undefiled robes thy servant, _name_, who is minded to precede thy
holy mysteries as a taper-bearer, that, being enlightened and meeting
thee in the world to come, he may obtain an incorruptible crown of life,
rejoicing with thine elect in everlasting blessedness.

_Exclamation._ For hallowed is thy name, and glorified is thy kingdom, of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, now and ever, and to
ages of ages. Amen.

_And be it noted that, if the liturgy be not celebrated, the Archpriest
maketh the beginning_, Blessed be our God.... _and then is sung_, O
heavenly King.... _Trisagion._ O most holy Trinity.... Our Father.... For
thine is the kingdom.... _And the troparion of the day is said._

_But if the liturgy be celebrated_, O heavenly King.... _and Trisagion
and_ Our Father.... _are not sung, and only these troparia are said._

O holy apostles, pray the merciful God that he may grant our souls
remission of sins.

The grace of thy mouth, shining forth like fire, hath illuminated the
universe, hath offered the world treasures of liberality, and hath shewed
to us the height of humility. And as thou instructest by thy words, O
father John Chrysostom, pray Christ, the Word of God, to save our souls.

Thy sound is gone forth into all the earth, which hath received thy word,
whereby thou hast divinely taught, hast explained the nature of things
that are, and brightened the customs of men, O royal divine, venerable
father: pray thou Christ God to save our souls.

The shepherd’s reed of thy divinity hath overcome the trumpets of the
orators; for as to him that seeketh the deep things of the spirit, so
was the grace of language accorded thee. Then, father Gregory, pray
Christ God to save our souls.

                            _Glory. Both now._

Through the prayers, O Lord, of all the saints, and of the God-bearing
one, grant thy peace to us, and have mercy upon us, as being alone
compassionate.

_Then the Archpriest sheareth his head crosswise, saying_, In the name
of the Father. _A protodeacon and a reader, or a singer, say_, Amen.
_Archpriest._ And of the Son. _Protodeacon._ Amen. _Archpriest._ And of
the Holy Ghost. _Protodeacon._ Amen.

_Then the Archpriest putteth the short phelonion on him, and again thrice
signeth him crosswise on his head with the hand, and layeth his hand upon
him, and prayeth thus,_

O Lord God almighty, elect this thy servant, and sanctify him, and grant
unto him, in all wisdom and understanding, to practise the study and
reading of thy divine words, preserving him in a blameless course of life.

                              _Exclamation._

Through the mercy, and compassions, and love to man of thine
only-begotten Son, with whom thou art blessed, together with thine
all-holy, and good, and life-creating Spirit, now and ever, and to ages
of ages. Amen.

_And after the prayer the Archpriest openeth the book of the apostles
over the head of the reader. And the subdeacons conduct him from the
Archpriest, and place him in the middle of the church, with his face
towards the east, and give him the book of the apostles, and he readeth
thus, The reading of the message of the holy apostle Paul to the Romans
(or, to others). And he readeth the portion of the epistle that is
appointed, from the beginning to the end, and turneth himself and boweth
thrice to the Archpriest according to rite. And the subdeacons take
off from him the phelonion, and conduct him to the Archpriest. And the
Archpriest again signeth his head thrice with the hand. And they bring
the sticharion to the Archpriest, and he signeth the sticharion with
his hand over the cross. And he that hath been appointed, having signed
himself with his hand, kisseth the cross upon the sticharion, and the
hand of the Archpriest; and the subdeacons vest him with the sticharion.
And the Archpriest addresseth him on this wise,_

Child, the first degree of the priesthood is that of reader. Therefore
it becometh thee to read every day in the divine scriptures, that they
that hear, considering thee, may receive edification, and that thou, in
nowise shaming thine election, mayest prepare thyself for a more advanced
degree. For, living temperately, holily, and righteously, thou shalt gain
the mercy of the man-loving God, and make thyself worthy of a higher
ministry, in Christ Jesus our Lord, to whom be glory to ages of ages.
Amen.

                _Then the Archpriest saith on this wise,_

Blessed be the Lord, lo, the servant of God, _name_, becometh reader of
the most holy church, _name_, in the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost.

_And the Archpriest giveth him a lamp, and he standeth before the
Archpriest with the lamp in the indicated place._

          _And if there be several readers to receive the laying
                 on of hands they receive this together,
                      and the prayer is said in the
                                 plural._




THE OFFICE THAT IS USED AT THE LAYING ON OF HANDS OF A SUBDEACON.


_Now if on the same day he is to receive the laying on of hands for the
subdiaconate, after the investing with the sticharion, the subdeacons
bring a sticharion-girdle to the Archpriest. And the Archpriest maketh
the sign of the cross upon the girdle, and he that is to receive the
laying on of hands kisseth the girdle, and the hand of the Archpriest,
and they gird him. And the Archpriest signeth him with the hand upon the
head thrice. After this the protodeacon saith_, Let us pray to the Lord.
_And the Archpriest, having laid his hand upon him, saith this prayer._

O Lord our God, who through one and the same holy Spirit, distributest
gifts to them whom thou hast chosen, bestowing various orders in thy
church, and appointing degrees of service therein for the ministration
of thy divine and spotless mysteries, who, in thine unspeakable
foreknowledge, dost also appoint this thy servant to be worthy to serve
in thy holy church; do thou thyself, O Master, preserve him blameless in
all things, and grant unto him to love the beauty of thy house, to stand
at the doors of thy holy temple, to kindle the lamp of the tabernacle
of thy glory; and plant him in thy holy church as a fruitful olive-tree
that beareth fruit of righteousness; and, at the time of thine advent,
declare thy servant perfected to receive the reward of them that have
been acceptable unto thee.

                                                            _Exclamation._

For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, now and ever, and to ages of ages.
Amen.

_And after the prayer the subdeacons give a ewer to him that is receiving
the laying on of hands, and lay a towel upon his shoulder; and the
Archpriest washeth his hands. And he that is receiving the laying on
of hands for subdeacon poureth water on the hands of the Archpriest.
After this he that is receiving the laying on of hands, and the other
subdeacons, kiss the Archpriest’s hand, and betake themselves from him to
the indicated place. And he that is receiving the laying on of hands for
subdeacon standeth, holding the ewer, and the wash-hand basin, together
with the towel, until the cherubic hymn. And he saith, Trisagion._ O
most holy Trinity.... Our Father.... Lord, have mercy. I believe in
one God.... Forgive, remit.... _and whatever else he is minded to say
secretly. And during the cherubic hymn he is conducted before the royal
doors to the Archpriest; and the Archpriest washeth his hands according
to rite, and saith the prayer. Then he signeth the water with his
hand crosswise thrice. And the Archpriest with this sanctified water
wetteth his eyes, ears, nostrils, and lips. And at the great introit he
walketh behind all the ministers. And when the Archpriest taketh up the
holy things, and all the ministers proceed into the altar, he that is
receiving the laying on of hands for subdeacon boweth to the Archpriest,
and beareth water to the right and left choirs, and to the people, and
they all splash themselves with this water. And they conduct him back
to the altar, and they pour the water that remaineth into the piscina.
And, being conducted, he remaineth before the royal doors, and standeth
in the indicated place according to rite. And when the Archpriest hath
said_, And may the mercies.... _after this exclamation he is conducted
into the altar by the subdeacons according to rite, and, having received
a blessing from the Archpriest, he standeth with the subdeacons._




THE OFFICE THAT IS USED AT THE LAYING ON OF HANDS OF A DEACON.


                    _After the Archpriest hath said,_

And may the mercies of the great God.... _the subdeacons bring forward
the throne, and place it before the holy table, but somewhat on the left
side, so that they may not turn their backs towards the holy things.
And the Archpriest seateth himself thereupon, and they take him that is
to receive the laying on of hands from the middle of the church, two
subdeacons holding him between them, each of them laying one hand upon
his neck, and with the other hand holding him by the hands, and they bow
him down as lowly as possible. And a deacon in the altar saith_, Bid.
_Then, having advanced somewhat, they bow him down as before. And another
deacon saith_, Bid ye. _Then they come nigh unto the holy gates of the
altar, and bow him down before the Archpriest._

                       _And the protodeacon saith,_

                       Bid, right reverend master.

_And the subdeacons leave him that is to receive the laying on of hands
at the royal gates, and two receive him, a protodeacon and a deacon, one
by the right and the other by the left hand, and he boweth himself to the
Archpriest. And the Archpriest signeth him with the hand crosswise, and
they conduct him round the holy table, they that lead him and the others
singing,_

O holy martyrs, who valiantly contended, and are crown’d; pray ye the
Lord for mercy on our souls.

_Then they that are without sing the same once. And he that is receiving
the laying on of hands kisseth the four corners of the holy table, and
the hand of the Archpriest, and his knee. Then they conduct him round
again, singing,_

Glory to thee, Christ God, apostles’ boast, and martyrs’ joy, whose
preaching was the consubstantial Trinity.

_And the choir without singeth the same once. And he that is receiving
the laying on of hands again kisseth the holy table in like manner as
before, and the Archpriest’s epigonation, and his hand._

_Then again they conduct him round, singing,_

Rejoice, O Esaias, the virgin is with child, and bringeth forth a son,
Emmanuel, God and man: the orient is his name, whom magnifying, we call
the virgin blessed.

_And they make the rite, as before written. And they sing the same
without. Then the Archpriest riseth, and they remove the throne, and he
that is receiving the laying on of hands goeth to the right side of the
Archpriest, and boweth himself before the holy table thrice, saying_, O
God, cleanse me, a sinner. _And, bending the right knee, he placeth his
palms crosswise on the holy table, and layeth also his forehead between
his hands on the holy table. The Archpriest placeth the end of the
omophorion on the head of him that it receiving the laying on of hands,
and blesseth him upon the head thrice. And the protodeacon or the deacon
having said_, Let us attend, _the Archpriest, holding his hand upon his
head, readeth aloud in the hearing of all them that stand in the altar,_

The divine grace, which always remedieth that which is feeble, and
supplieth that which is lacking, layeth hands upon, _name_, the most
pious subdeacon to be deacon: let us therefore pray for him, that the
grace of the all-holy Spirit may come upon him.

_And the priests within sing, from the right hand side_, Lord, have
mercy, _thrice. Then again, from the left hand side, the same thrice.
And the singers without, in the right and left choirs_, Kyrie eleison,
_antiphonally thrice slowly, while the Archpriest readeth the prayer.
Then the Archpriest blesseth him upon the head thrice, holding his hand
upon the head of him that is receiving the laying on of hands. The
protodeacon saith_, Let us pray to the Lord, _in a low voice._

             _And the Archpriest saith the prayer secretly._

O Lord our God, who, by thy foreknowledge sendest the gift of thy holy
Spirit on them that are destined, by thine unsearchable might, to be
ministers, and to serve at thy spotless mysteries; do thou thyself, O
Master, preserve in every virtue this man whom thou art well-pleased to
lay hands upon by me for the ministry of the diaconate, he holding the
mystery of the faith in a pure conscience. Give unto him the grace which
thou gavest to thy protomartyr Stephen, whom thou didst first call to the
work of thy ministry; and make him worthy to use, as may be acceptable
unto thee, the degree which, by thy goodness, is given unto him (for they
that minister well prepare for themselves a good degree); and do thou
declare him thy perfect servant.

                              _Exclamation._

                 For thine is the kingdom, and the power,
                   and the glory, of the Father, and of
                     the Son, and of the Holy Ghost,
                           now and ever, and to
                              ages of ages.
                                  Amen.

_And the protodeacon readeth that which is of peace in a low voice._ In
peace let us pray to the Lord. _And they answer to each petition_, Lord
have mercy, _once_. For the peace that is from above.... For the peace
of the whole world.... For our archpriest, _name_, for his priesthood,
assistance, continuance, peace, health, salvation, and for the work of
his hands, let us pray to the Lord. For the servant of God, _name_, now
receiving the laying on of hands for deacon, and for his salvation, let
us pray to the Lord. That the man-loving God may bestow on him a spotless
and blameless diaconate, let us pray to the Lord. For our Most Pious,
Autocratic Great Lord, THE EMPEROR ALEXANDER ALEXANDROVITCH of all
Russia, and for all HIS palace and army, let us pray to the Lord. For
this city.... For our deliverance.... Help us, save us, have mercy on
us.... Commemorating our most holy, most pure.... _They answer_, To thee,
O Lord.

               _And the Archpriest, holding his hand on the
          head of him that is receiving the laying on of hands,
                        saith the second prayer._

O God our Saviour, who, by thine incorruptible voice, didst appoint
the law of the diaconate unto thine apostles, and didst declare the
protomartyr Stephen of such rank, and proclaim him the first to fulfil
the work of a deacon, as it is written in thy holy gospel, Whosoever
desireth to be the first among you, let him be your minister; do thou,
O Master of all, fill this thy servant, whom thou hast made worthy to
enter on the ministry of a deacon, with all faith, and love, and power,
and sanctification, through the visitation of thy holy and life-creating
Spirit (for it is not by the imposition of my hands, but by the presence
of thy compassions, that grace is given unto them that are worthy of
thee), that he, being without any sin, may stand blameless before thee in
the fearful day of thy judgment, and may receive the unfailing reward of
thy promise.

_Exclamation._ For thou art our God, and to thee we ascribe glory, to the
Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, now and ever, and to ages
of ages. Amen.

_Then they raise him up, and loosen his girding. And the Archpriest,
taking the orarion, layeth it upon his left shoulder saying with a loud
voice,_ Axios. _And they sing in the altar thrice_, Axios. _And in like
manner without by both choirs. Then the maniples are given him, and the
Archpriest saith_, Axios. _And they sing the same in the altar thrice,
and in like manner without. Then the fan is given him, and the Archpriest
saith_, Axios. _And they sing in the altar and without according to
custom. And he kisseth the Archpriest on the shoulder, and placeth
himself by the altar, and fanneth the holy things._




THE OFFICE THAT IS USED AT THE APPOINTMENT OF AN ARCHDEACON AND A
PROTODEACON.


_He that is to be appointed an archdeacon is led by a protodeacon and a
deacon unto the right reverend Archpriest in the middle of the church,
where the Archpriest is standing at the time of the introit with the
gospel; and he inclineth himself to his girdle before the Archpriest
thrice, and boweth his head. And the Archpriest, sitting, signeth him
with the hand on his head crosswise, thrice; and, rising, he layeth his
hand upon his head. And the deacon having said_, Let us pray to the Lord,

                   _the Archpriest saith this prayer._

Master, Lord our God, who, by thine unspeakable providence, hast given to
our race archdeaconship, that they that are endued therewith may command
and serve, with the subordinate ministers at thy divine mysteries; do
thou thyself endue with this grace of archdeaconship thy present servant,
_name_, and adorn him with thy virtue to stand at the head of the deacons
of thy people, and to be a good example to them that are under him. And
make him to attain unto a ripe old age to glorify thy majestic name, of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, now and ever, and to
ages of ages. Amen.

_Then the Archpriest signeth his head crosswise, saying_, Blessed be the
Lord, lo, the servant of God, _name_, is archdeacon (or protodeacon) in
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

_And the Archpriest, laying his hand upon his head, exclaimeth_, Axios,
_thrice. And the singers sing_, Axios, _thrice. And they enter the altar
according to rite._




THE OFFICE THAT IS USED AT THE LAYING ON OF HANDS OF A PRESBYTER.


_After the conclusion of the cherubic hymn, he that is to be appointed
presbyter is conducted by an archdeacon, or by one of the other deacons,
through the royal gates unto the holy table before the Archpriest on the
right hand side. And the Archpriest signeth him with the hand crosswise,
and he is conducted round the throne thrice, as it is written in the
diaconal laying on of hands, while all in the altar sing these troparia._

O holy martyrs, who valiantly contended and are crown’d; pray ye the Lord
for mercy on out souls.

                                                                   _Once._

Glory to thee, Christ God, apostles’ boast and martyrs’ joy, whose
preaching was the consubstantial Trinity.

                                                                   _Once._

_Then_, Rejoice, O Esaias, the virgin is with child, and bringeth forth a
son, Emmanuel, God and man: the orient is his name, whom magnifying, we
call the virgin blessed.

                                                                   _Once._

_And he bendeth both knees, and placeth his palms crosswise on the holy
table, and layeth his forehead between his hands on the holy table. The
Archpriest placeth the end of the omophorion on the head of him that is
receiving the laying on of hands, and blesseth him upon the head thrice.
And the leading priest having said_, Let us attend, _the Archpriest,
holding his hand upon his head, readeth aloud in the hearing of all them,
that stand in the altar,_

The divine grace, which always remedieth that which is feeble, and
supplieth that which is lacking, layeth hands upon, _name_, the most
pious deacon, to be presbyter: let us therefore pray for him, that the
grace of the all-holy Spirit may come upon him.

_And the priests within sing_, Lord, have mercy, _thrice from the right
hand side. Then again thrice from the left hand side. Then in like manner
also the singers without in the right and left choirs,_ Kyrie eleison,
_antiphonally thrice slowly, while the Archpriest readeth the prayer.
The Archpriest again blesseth him thrice, having his hand lying upon the
head of him that is receiving the laying on of hands. And the protodeacon
saith_, Let us pray to the Lord, _in a low voice._

               _The Archpriest saith the prayer secretly._

O God, unbeginning and unending, who art older than every created thing,
who honourest with the tide of presbyter them who are made worthy in
this degree to minister sacredly the word of thy truth; do thou thyself,
O Master of all, vouchsafe that this man, whom thou art well-pleased to
lay hands upon by me, may receive, in a blameless conversation and in
unswerving faith, this great grace of thy holy Spirit, and declare him
thy perfect servant, acceptable unto thee in all things, and worthily
exercising this great priestly honour vouchsafed unto him by thy
foreknowing power.

                              _Exclamation._

            For thine is the might, and thine is the kingdom,
                   and the power, and the glory, of the
                    Father, and of the Son, and of the
                        Holy Ghost, now and ever,
                           and to ages of ages.
                                  Amen.

_And the priest readeth that which is of peace in a low voice._

In peace let us pray to the Lord. _They answer to each petition_, Lord,
have mercy, _once_. For the peace that is from above.... For the peace
of the whole world.... For our archpriest, _name_, for his priesthood,
assistance, continuance, peace, health, salvation, and for the work of
his hands, let us pray to the Lord. For the Servant of God, _name_, now
receiving the laying on of hands for presbyter, and for his salvation,
let us pray to the Lord. That the man-loving God may bestow on him a
spotless and blameless priesthood, let us pray to the Lord. For our Most
Pious, Autocratic Great Lord, THE EMPEROR ALEXANDER ALEXANDROVITCH of all
Russia, and for all HIS palace and army, let us pray to the Lord. For
this city.... For our deliverance.... Help us, save us.... Commemorating
our most holy, most pure.... _They answer_, To thee, O Lord.

_The Archpriest, having his hand lying on the head of him that is
receiving the laying on of hands, prayeth thus,_

O God, mighty in power, and unsearchable in understanding, wonderful
in counsels above the sons of men; do thou thyself, O Lord, fill with
the gift of thy holy Spirit this man, whom thou art well-pleased should
attain unto the presbyterial degree, that he may be worthy to stand
blamelessly at thine altar, to declare the gospel of thy kingdom, to
minister sacredly the word of thy truth, to offer unto thee gifts
and spiritual sacrifices, and to renew thy people by the laver of
regeneration, that he, meeting thee at the second coming of the great God
and our Saviour, Jesus Christ, thine only-begotten Son, may receive the
reward of a good stewardship of his order, in the plentitude of thy grace.

                              _Exclamation._

For blessed and glorified is thine all-revered and majestic name, of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, now and ever, and to ages
of ages. Amen.

_Then they raise him up, and bring the epitrachelion, and taking
the orarion from him that hath received the laying on of hands, the
Archpriest giveth him the epitrachelion, having blessed it, and he that
hath received the laying on of hands kisseth the epitrachelion, and the
Archpriest’s hand. And the Archpriest layeth it upon his neck, saying
with a loud voice_, Axios. _And they sing in the altar thrice_, Axios.
_And the singers without sing the same in both choirs. In like manner
he giveth him also the girdle, and he kisseth it, and the Archpriest’s
hand, and girdeth himself. And the Archpriest saith_, Axios. _And they
sing in the altar and without in like manner. And they do the same with
the phelonion, and with the sloujébnik. And the Archpriest saith with
each_, Axios. _And they sing according to custom. And, having kissed the
omophorion and the Archpriest’s hand, he that hath received the laying on
of hands as priest goeth out and kisseth the archimandrites, and all the
co-ministrants on the shoulder, and standeth with the priests._




THE ORDER OF THE OFFICE FOR THE MAKING OF A PROTOPRESBYTER.


_He that is to be appointed protopresbyter is conducted by a protodeacon,
or by two deacons, to the right reverend Archpriest in the middle of the
church, where the Archpriest standeth at the time of the introit with
the gospel. And he inclineth himself to his girdle before the Archpriest
thrice, and boweth his head. And the Archpriest, sitting, signeth him
with the hand on his head crosswise thrice. And, rising, he layeth his
hand upon his head. And the protodeacon having said_, Let us pray to the
Lord,

                   _the Archpriest saith this prayer._

Master, Lord Jesus Christ, our God, who hast bestowed priesthood on our
race, and hast endued us with the grace of this gift and honour, and hast
appointed us who are sufficiently pious to rule the priestly order, and
the other subordinate ministers of thy mysteries; do thou thyself endue
our brother, _name_, with thy grace, and adorn him with virtue to stand
at the head of the presbyters of thy people, and make him worthy to be a
good example to them that are with him; and be thou pleased that he may
finish his life in piety and virtue unto a good old age; and, as the good
God, have mercy upon us all. For thou art the giver of wisdom, and all
creation singeth thee to ages of ages.

_Then the Archpriest signeth his head crosswise, saying_, Blessed be the
Lord, lo, the servant of God, _name_, becometh protopresbyter of the most
holy church of God, _name_, in the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost.

_And the Archpriest, laying his hand upon his head, exclaimeth_, Axios,
_iii. And the singers sing,_ Axios, _thrice. Then they range the
protopresbyter with the other clergy according to rite, and they go
into the altar through the royal doors, and they act with the ministers
according to rite._




THE OFFICE THAT IS USED AT THE APPOINTMENT OF AN ABBOT.


_He that is to be appointed abbot is conducted by a protodeacon, or by
two deacons, to the Archpriest in the middle of the church, where the
Archpriest standeth at the time of the introit with the gospel, if the
Archpriest himself be celebrating the liturgy. But if not, they bring
to the Archpriest the epitrachelion, the maniples, and the omophorion,
and he vesteth himself, standing in his place. And he that is to be
appointed abbot is conducted to his place, and inclineth himself to
his girdle before the Archpriest thrice, and boweth his head. And the
Archpriest, sitting, signeth him with the hand upon his head thrice. And,
rising, he layeth his hand upon his head, and the protodeacon having
said_, Let us pray to the Lord,

                   _the Archpriest saith this prayer._

O God, who ever makest provision for the salvation of men, and gatherest
together in one this thy rational flock; do thou, O Master of all things,
in thy measureless love to man, thyself preserve this same blameless,
keeping thy commandments continually, so that not one sheep thereof may
be lost, and be devoured by the wolf. And declare this thy servant,
whom thou art pleased to appoint abbot over it, worthy of thy grace,
and adorn him with all virtues, that he, by his works, may be a good
example to them that are under him, that they, being emulators of his
blameless conversation, may stand with him uncondemned before thy fearful
judgment-seat.

_Exclamation._ For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, now and ever, and to
ages of ages. _Singers._ Amen.

                       _Archpriest._ Peace to all.

_Singers._ And to thy spirit. _Protodeacon._ Bow your heads to the Lord.
_Singers._ To thee, O Lord.

                    _The Archpriest prayeth secretly._

Incline thine ear, O Lord, and hearken unto our prayer, and declare this
thy servant to be abbot of this honourable habitation, a faithful and
wise administrator over the rational flock committed to him by thy grace,
he doing thy will in all things, and becoming worthy of thy heavenly
kingdom.

                              _Exclamation._

Through the grace, and compassions, and love to man of thine
only-begotten Son, with whom thou art blessed, together with thine
all-holy, and good, and life-creating Spirit, now and ever, and to ages
of ages. Amen.

_And the protodeacon saith with a loud voice_, Bid, master.

              _And the Archpriest saith with a loud voice,_

The grace of the all-holy Spirit, through our mediocrity, appointeth thee
abbot of the honourable habitation of our Lord, God, and Saviour, Jesus
Christ, _name, whatever title of him the temple may be, or_, of our most
holy God-bearing Lady, _whatever title of her the temple may be, or_, of
Saint, _name, to whom may be dedicated the temple_.

_Then, laying his hand upon his head, the Archpriest exclaimeth_, Axios,
_thrice. And the singers sing_, Axios, _thrice._

              _After this he that hath been appointed abbot
             kisseth the Archpriest’s omophorion on the right
           and left shoulder; and, being conducted, he rangeth
           himself with the other abbots according to rite; and
                 they go into the altar through the royal
                      doors, and he acteth with the
                           ministers according
                                to rite._




THE OFFICE THAT IS USED AT THE APPOINTMENT OF AN ARCHIMANDRITE.


_He that is to be appointed archimandrite is conducted by a protodeacon,
or by two deacons, to the Archpriest in the middle of the church where
the Archpriest standeth at the time of the introit with the gospel, if
the Archpriest himself be celebrating the liturgy. But if not, they bring
the epitrachelion, the maniples, and the omophorion to the Archpriest,
and he vesteth himself standing in his place. And he that is to be
appointed archimandrite is conducted to his place, and he inclineth
himself to his girdle thrice before the Archpriest, and boweth his head.
And the Archpriest, sitting, signeth him with the hand upon his head
thrice. And if he that is to be appointed archimandrite be not an abbot,
the Archpriest saith over him the prayers which are said over an abbot.
But if he be already an abbot the prayers for an abbot are not said over
the archimandrite, and the protodeacon only saith with a loud voice,_

                               Bid, master.

            _And the Archpriest exclaimeth with a loud voice,_

The grace of the all-holy Spirit, through our mediocrity, appointeth
thee archimandrite of the honourable habitation of our Lord, God, and
Saviour, Jesus Christ, or, of our most holy God-bearing Lady, _whatever
temple of her it may be, or_, of Saint, _name, to whom may be dedicated
the temple_.

_Then the Archpriest, laying his hand on the head of him that is
appointed, exclaimeth_ Axios, _thrice._

                 _And the singers sing_, Axios, _thrice._

                _And if, by the command of our Most Pious,
                    Autocratic Great Lord, THE EMPEROR
                       ALEXANDER ALEXANDROVITCH of
            all Russia, and with the blessing of the Most Holy
        Governing Synod, the mitre be given to the archimandrite,
                 then after the procession from the altar
         with the gospel at the divine liturgy, the archimandrite
                 is conducted to the Archpriest. And the
          Archpriest doth not say the prayer, but only blesseth
             the archimandrite with the hand. And he kisseth
              the Archpriest’s hand, and the mitre; and they
             place the mitre on the archimandrite. And, being
          conducted, he rangeth himself with the archimandrites
                     and abbots according to degree,
                    and they go into the altar through
                      the royal doors, and he acteth
                            with the ministers
                               according to
                                  rite._

[Illustration]
